
lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CA P. 23 Order 1981 

CHAPTER 23 

THE ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA CONSTITUTION ORDER 1981 

STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS 

1981 No. 1106 

Made 

31st July 1981 

Corning into Operation 31 st October 1 981 

At the Court at Buckingham Palace, the 31 st day ofJu Iy 1981 Present, 

The Queen's Most Excellent Majesty in Council 

Whereas the status of association of Antigua with the United Kingdom is to terminate on 1st November 
1981 and it is necessary to establish a new constitution for Antigua upon its attainment of fully 
responsible status within the Com­ monwealth under the style of Antigua and Barbuda: 

And whereas the Associated State of Antigua has, by resolutions passed in the Senate thereof on 1 st 
May 1981 and in the House of Representatives thereof on 23rd April 1981, requested and consented to 
the making of this Order for that purpose: 

Now, therefore, Her Majesty, by virtue and in exer­ cise of the powers vested in Her in that behalf by 
section 5(4) of the West Indies Act 1967 (a), is pleased, by and with the advice of Her Privy Council, 
to order, and it is hereby ordered, as follows- 

(1) This Order may be cited as the Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981. 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

2 

CAP. 23) The Anti'ua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

(2) This Order shall come into operation on 31st Octo ber 1981. 

2. The Antigua Constitution Order 1967(b), The Antigua Constitution (Amendment) Order 1972(c), and the 
Antigua Constitution (Amendment) Order 1975 (d),which made provision for the constitution of the 
Associated State of Antigua, are revoked. 

3. The Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda set out in Schedule 1 to this Order shall come into effect 
in Antigua and Barbuda on 1st November 1981 subject to the transi­ tional provisions set out in 
Schedule 2 to this Order. 

N. E. Leigh, Clerk of the Privy Council. 

(a) 1967 c. 4. 

(c) S.1. 19721301. 

(b) S.1. 1967/225. (d) S.1. 197512160. 

LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBl!DA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

3 

SCHEDULE 1 TO THE ORDER 

THE CONSTITUTION OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

Arrangement of Sections Section 

CHAPTER I 

The State and the Constitution 

1. The State and its territory. 

2. Constitution is supreme law. 

CHAPTER II 

Protection of Fundamental Rights and 

Freedoms of the Individual 

3. Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. 

4. Protection of right to life. 

5. Protection of right to personal liberty. 

6. Protection from slavery and forced labour. 

7. Protection from inhuman treatment. 

8. Protection from freedom of movement. 

9. Protection from deprivation of property. 

10. Protection of person or property from arbitrary search or entry. 

11. Protection of freedom of conscience. 

12. Protection of freedom of expression including freedom of the press. 

13. Protection of freedom of assembly and association. 

14. Protection from d iscrim ination on grounds of race, sex etc. 

15. Provision to secure protection of the law. 

16. Derogations from fundamental rights and freedoms 

under emergency powers. 

17. Protection of persons detained under emergency laws. 

18. Enforcement of protective provisions. 

19. Protection from derogations from fundamental rights and freedoms generally. 

20. Declaration of public emergency. 

21. Interpretation and savings. 


lAWS OF ANTIGlIAAND BARBliDA 

4 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

CHAPTER III 

The Governor-General 

Section 

22. Establishment of office. 

23. Acting Governor-General 

24. Oaths. 

25. Deputy to Governor-General. 

26. Public Seal. 

CHAPTER IV 

Parliament 

PART 1 

Establishment and composition of Parliament 

27. Establishment of Parliament. 

The Senate 

28. Composition of the Senate. 

29. Qualifications for appointment as Senators. 

30. Disqualifications from appointment as Senators. 

31. Tenure of office of Senators. 

32. Appointment of temporary Senators. 

33. President and Vice-President. 

34. Attendance of Attorney-General at proceedings of Senate. 

35. Attendance at proceedings of Senate of Ministers who are members of the House. 

The House if Representatives 

36. Composition of the House. 

37. Attendance at proceedings of the House of Ministers who are members of the Senate. 

38. Qualifications for election as a member of the House. 

39. Disqualifications from election as a member of the 

House. 

40. Election of members of the House. 

41. Tenure of seats of members of the House. 

42. Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 

43. Clerks to Houses of Parliament and their staffs. 

44. Determination of questions of membership. 

45. Unqualified persons sitting or voting. 
 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBIJDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

5 

PART 2 

Powers and Procedure of Parliament 

Section 

46. Power to make laws. 

47. Alteration of this Constitution and Supreme Court 

Order. 

48. Oath of allegiance by members of Parliament. 

49. Presiding in Senate and House. 

50. Quorum. 

51. Voting. 

52. Mode of exercising legislative power. 

53. Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures. 

54. Restrictions on powers of Senate as to money bills. 

55. Restrictions on powers of Senate as to bills other than 

money bills. 

56. Provisions relating to sections 53, 54 and 55. 

57. Regulation of procedure of Houses of Parliament. 

58. Freedom of speech in proceedings of Parliament. 

PART 3 

Summoning. Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliament 

59. Sessions of Parliament. 

60. Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament. 

61. General elections and appointment of Senators. 

PART 4 

Delimitations of Constituencies 

62. Constituencies. 

63. Constituencies Boundaries Commission. 

64. Report by Commission. 

65. Procedure upon report. 

PART 5 

The Ombudsman 

66. Establishment, appointment, functions etc. of Ombudsman. 


6 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

PART 6 

]he Supervisor of Elections 

Section 

67. Appointment, functions and removal of Supervisor of Elections. 

CHAPTER V 

Executive Powers 

PART 1 General 

68. Executive authority. 

69. Ministers of Government. 

70. The Cabinet. 

71. Allocation of portfolios. 

72. Summoning of Cabinet. 

73. Tenure of office of Ministers. 

74. Performance of functions of Prime Minister during absence, illness or suspension. 

75. Parliamentary Secretaries. 

76. Oaths to be taken by Ministers and Parliamentary 

Secretaries. 

77. Secretary to the Cabinet. 

78. Permanent Secretaries. 

79. Leader of the Opposition. 

80. Exercise of Governor-General's functions. 

81. Governor-General to be informed concerning Government matters. 

82. Attorney-General. 

83. Exercise of certain powers of Governor-General. 

84. Power of pardon. 

85. Advisory Committee on Prerogative of Mercy. 

86. Functions of Advisory Committee. 

PART 2 

Director of Public Prosecutions 

87. Appointment and removal of Director of Public Prosecutions. 

88. Powers and functions of Director of Public Prosecutions. 

89. Directions to Director of Public Prosecutions. 



7 

CHAPTER VI 

Finance 

Section 

90. Consolidated Fund. 

91. Withdrawals from Consolidated Fund or other public funds. 

92. Authorisation of expenditure from Consolidated Fund by appropriation law. 

93. Authorisation of expenditure in advance of 

appropriation. 

94. Contingencies Fund. 

95. Remuneration of certain officers. 

96. Public Debt. 

97. Audit of public accounts, etc. 9S. Public Accounts Committee. 

CHAPTER VII The Public Service 

PART 1 

The Public Service Commission 

99. Establishment and composition of Commission. 

100. Appointment etc. of public officers. 

101. Appointment etc. of permanent secretaries and certain other officers. 

102. The Director of Audit. 

103. Appointment etc. of magistrates, registrars and legal officers. 

PART 2 

The Police Service Commission 

104. Establishment and composition of Commission. 

105. Appointment etc. of police officers. 

PART 3 

The Public Service Board of Appeal 

106. Constitution of Board, etc. 

107. Appeals in disciplinary cases. lOS. Powers and procedure of Board. 

8 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

PART 4 

Pensions 

Section 

109. Pensions laws and protection of pension rights. 

110. Power to withhold pensions etc. 

CHAPTER VIII 

Citizenship 

Ill. Belonger status. 

112. Persons who automatically become citizens at commencement of this Constitution. 

113. Persons who automatically become citizens after commencement of this Constitution. 

114. Persons entitled to citizenship by registration after commencement of this Constitution. 

115. Dual citizenship. 

116. Powers of Parliament. 

117. Oath of allegiance. 

118. Interpretation. 

CHAPTER IX 

Judicial Provisions 

119. Original jurisdiction of High Court in constitutional 

questions. 

120. Reference of constitutional questions to High Court. 

121. Appeals to Court of Appeal. 

122. Appeals to Her Majesty in Council. 

CHAPTER X 

Miscellaneous 

123. Local government. 

124. Certain questions not to be enquired into in any court. 

125. Resignations. 

126. Re-appointments and concurrent appointments. 

127. Interpretation. 
 

lAWS OF ANTlGUAAND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

9 

SCHEDULE 1 TO THE CONSTITUTION PART I 

The Provisions of the Constitution referred to in section 47(5). 

PART II 

The provisions of the Supreme Court Order referred to in section 47(5). 

SCHEDULE 2 TO THE CONSTITUTION SCHEDULE 3 TO THE CONSTITUTION 

Oath (or affirmation) of allegiance and office. 

SCHEDULE 2 TO THE ORDER 

THE CONSTITUTION OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

WHEREAS the People of Antigua and Barbuda- 

(a) proclaim that they are a sovereign nation founded upon principles that acknowledge the supremacy 
of God, the dignity and worth ofthe human person, the entitlement of all persons to the fundamental 
rights and freedoms of the individual, the position of the family in a society of free men and women
and free institutions; 

(b) respect the principles of social justice and, therefore, believe that the operation of their 
economic system should result in the material resources of their community being so distributed as to 
serve the common good, that there should be adequate means oflivelihood for all, that labour should 
|not be exploited or forced by economic necessity to operate in inhumane condi­ tions but that there 
should be opportunity for advance­ ment on the basis of recognition of merit, ability and integrity; 


10 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

The State and its territory. 

Constitution is supreme law. 

(c) assert their conviction that their happiness and prosperity can best be pursued in a democratic 
society in which all persons may, to the extent of their cap­ acity, play some part in the national 
life; 

(d) recognize that the law symbolises the public conscience, that every citizen owes to it an 
undivided allegiance not to be limited by any private views ofjustice or expediency and that the State 
is subject to the law; 

(e) desire to establish a framework of supreme law within which to guarantee their inalienable human 
rights and freedoms, among them, the rights to liberty, pro­ perty, security and legal redress of 
grievances, as well as freedom of speech, of the press and of assembly, sub­ ject only to the public 
interest: 

Now, THEREFORE the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda- 

CHAPTER I 

The State and the Constitution 

1. (1) Antigua and Barbuda shall be a unitary sovereign democratic State. 

(2) The territory of Antigua and Barbuda shall com­ prise the islands of Antigua, Barbuda and Redonda 
and all other areas that were comprised in Antigua on 31st October 1981 together with such other areas 
as may be declared by Act of Parliament to form part of the territory of Antigua and Barbuda. 

2. This Constitution is the supreme law of Antigua and Barbuda and, subject to the provisions of this 
Constitu­ tion, if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall 
prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void. 


lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

11 

CHAPTER II 

Protection cf Fundamental Rights and Freedoms cf tle Individual 

3. Whereas every person in Antigua and Barbuda is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of 
the individual, that is to say, the right, regardless of race, place of origin, political opinions or 
affiliations, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and 
for the public interest, to each and all of the follow­ ing, namely- 

(a) life, liberty, security of the person, the enjoy­ ment of property and the protection of the law; 

(b) freedom of conscience, of expression (including freedom of the press) and of peaceful assembly and 
association; and 

(c) protection for his family life, his personal privacy, the privacy of his home and other property 
and from deprivation of property without fair compensation, 

the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to the 
aforesaid rights and freedoms, subject to such limitations of that pro­ tection as are contained in 
those provisions, being limita­ tions designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and 
freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest. 

4. (1) No person shall be deprived of his life inten­ tionally save in execution of the sentence of a 
court in respect of a crime of treason or murder of which he has been convicted. 

(2) A person shall not be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contravention of this 
section if he dies as the result of the use, to such extent and such circumstances as are permitted by 
law, of such force as is reasonably justifiable- 

(a) for the defence of any person from violence or for the defence of property; 

Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. 

Protection of right to life. 


12 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBlJDA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Protection of right to personal liberty. 

(b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully detained; 

(c) for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrec­ tion or mutiny; or 

(d) in order lawfully to prevent the commission by that person of a criminal offence, 

or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war. 

5. (1) No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty save as may be authorised by law in any of 
the follow­ ing cases, that is to say- 

(a) in consequence of his unfitness to plead to a criminal charge; 

(b) in execution of the sentence or order of a co urt, whether established for Antigua and Barbuda or 
some other country, in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been convicted; 

(c) in execution of an order of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal or such other court as may be 
prescribed by Parliament on the grounds of his con­ tempt of any such court or of another court or 
tribunal; 

(d) in execution of the order of a court made in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation 
imposed on him by law; 

(e) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of the order of a court; 

(f) upon reasonable suspicion of his having com­ mitted or of being about to commit a criminal offence 
under any law; 

(g) under the order of a court or with the consent of his parent or guardian, for his education or 
welfare during any period ending not later than the date when he attains the age of eighteen years; 

(h) for the purpose of preventing the spread of «n infectious or contagious disease; 

(i) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of unsound mind, addicted to 
drugs 


LAWS OF ANTIGlJAAND BARBlJDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

13 

or alcohol, or a vagrant, for the purpose of his care or treatment or the protection of the community; 

(j) for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of that person into Antigua and Barbuda, or for 
the purpose of effecting the expulsion, extradition or other lawful removal of that person from 
Antigua and Barbuda or for the purpose of restricting that person while he is being conveyed through 
Antigua and Barbuda in the course of his extradition or removal as a convicted prisoner from one 
country to another; or 

(k) to such extent as may be necessary in the execution of a lawful order requiring that person to 
remain within a specified area within Antigua and Barbuda or prohibiting him from being within such an 
area or to such extent as may be reasonably justifiable for the taking of proceedings against that 
person relating to the making of any such order or relating to such an order after it has been made, 
or to such extent as may be reasonably justifiable for restraining that person dur­ ing any visit that 
he is permitted to make to any part of Antigua and Barbuda in which, in consequence of any such order, 
his presence would otherwise be unlawful. 

(2) Any person who is arrested or detained shall be informed orally and in writing as soon as 
reasonably practic­ able, in language that he understands, of the reason for his arrest or detention. 

(3) Any person who is arrested or detained shall have the right, at any stage and at his own expense, 
to retain and instruct without delay a legal practitioner of his own choice, and to hold private 
communications with him, and in the case of a minor he shall also be afforded a reasonable opportunity 
for communication with his parent or guardian. 

(4) When a person is arrested, excessive bail shall not be required in those cases where bail is being 
granted. 

(5) Any person who is arrested or detained- 

(a) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of the orderofa court; 0 r 


lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

14 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

(b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having com­ mitted or being about to commit a criminal offence 
under any law, 

and who is not released shall be brought before the court within forty-eight hours after his detention 
and, in computing time for the purposes of this subsection, Sundays and public holidays shall be 
excluded. 

(6) If any person arrested or detained as mentioned in subsection (5Xb) of this section is not tried 
within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any further proceedings which may be brought 
against him, he shall be released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in 
particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at a later date for 
trial or for pro­ ceedings preliminary to trial and, subject to subsection (4) of this section, such 
conditions may include bail. 

(7) Any person who is unlawfully arrested or detained by any other person shall, subject to such 
defences as may be provided by law, be entitled to compensation for such unlawful arrest or detention 
from the person who made the arrest or effected the detention, from any person or authority on whose 
behalf the person making the arrest or effecting the detention was acting or from them both: 

Provided that a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace or an officer of a court or a police 
officer acting in pursuance of the order of a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace shall not 
be under any personal liability to pay compensation under this subsection in consequence of any act 
performed by him in good faith in the discharge of the functions of his office and any liability to 
pay any such com­ pensation in consequence of any such act shall be a liability of the Crown. 

(8) For the purposes of subsection (l)(b) of this section, a person charged with a criminal offence in 
respect of whom a special verdict has been returned that he was guilty of the act or omission charged 
but was insane when he did the act or made the omission shall be regarded as a person who has been 
convicted of a criminal offence and the detention of that person in consequence of such a verdict 
shall be regard­ ed as detention in execution of the order of a court. 



15 

6. 

(1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude. 

(2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour. 

(3) For the purposes of this section, the expression "forced labour" does not include- 

(a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court; 

(b) any labour required of any person while he is lawfully detained that, though not required in 
conse­ quence of the sentence or order ofa court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene 
or for the maintenance of the place at which he is detained; 

(c) any labour required of a member of a disciplined force in pursuance of his duties as such or, in 
the case of a person who has conscientious objections to service as a member ofa naval, military or 
air force, any labour that that person is required by law to per­ form in place of such service; 

(d) any labour required during any period of public emergency or, in the event of any other emergency 
or calam ity that threatens the life and well-being of the community, to the extent that the requiring 
of such labour is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of any situation arising or existing 
during that period or as a result of that other emergency or calamity, for the purpose of dealing with 
that situation. 

7. (1) No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other such 
treatment. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in con­ travention of this section to the extent that the law in question authorises the infliction 
of any description of punishment that was lawful in Antigua on 31st October 1981. 

8. (1) A person shall not be deprived of his freedom of movement, that is to say, the right to move 
freely throughout Antigua and Barbuda, the right to reside in any part of Antigua and Barbuda, the 
right to enter Antigua 

Protection from slaverv and forced'labour. 

Protection from inhuman treatmeut. 

Protection of freedom of movement. 
 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

16 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

and Barbuda, the right to leave Antigua and Barbuda and immunity from expulsion from Antigua and 
Barbuda. 

(2) Any restrictions on a person's fredom of movement that is involved in his lawful detention shall 
not be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section. 

(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in contravention of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision- 

(a) for the imposition of restrictions on the movements or residence within Antigua and Barbuda of any 
person or on any person's right to leave Antigua and Barbuda that are reasonably required in the 
interests of defence, public safety or public order; 

(b) for the imposition of restrictions on the movements or residence within Antigua and Barbuda or on 
the right to leave Antigua and Barbuda of persons generally or any class of persons in the interests 
of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, or public health or, in respect of the right 
to leave Antigua and Barbuda, or securing compliance with any international obligation of Antigua and 
Barbuda parti­ culars of which have been laid before the House and except so far as that provision or, 
as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably 
justifiable in a democratic society; 

(c) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of a court, on the movement or residence within 
Antigua and Barbuda of any person or on any person's right to leave Antigua and Barbuda either in 
consequence of his having been found guilty of a criminal offence under a law or for the purpose of 
ensuring that he appears before a court at a later date for trial of such a criminal offence or for 
proceedings relating to his extradition or lawful removal from Antigua and Barbuda; 

(d) for the imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement of any person who is not a citizen; 


LAWS OF ANTlGlJAAND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

17 

(e) for the imposition of restrictions on the acquisi­ tion or use by any person of land or other 
property in Antigua and Barbuda; 

(f) for the imposition of restrictions upon the move­ ment or residence within Antigua and Barbuda or 
on the right to leave Antigua and Barbuda of any public officer that are reasonably required for the 
proper per­ formance of his functions; 

(g) for the removal of a person from Antigua and Barbuda to be tried or punished in some other country 
for a criminal offence under the law of that other country or to undergo imprisonment in some other 
country in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence under a law of which 
he has been con­ victed; or 

(h) for the imposition of restrictions on the right of any person to leave Antigua and Barbuda that 
are reasonably required in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligations imposed on that person by 
law and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority 
thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 

(4) If any person whose freedom of movement has been restricted by virtue of such a provision as is 
referred to in subsection (3)(a) of this section so requests at any time during the period of that 
restriction not earlier than two months after the restriction was imposed or two months after he last 
made such a request, as the case may be, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial 
tribunal consisting of a president who shall be a legal practitioner of not less than seven years 
standing appointed by the Chief Justice and two other members appointed by the Governor-General acting 
in his discretion. 

(5) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of subsec­ tion (4) of this section of the case of any 
person whose freedom of movement has been restricted, the tribunal may make recommendations concerning 
the necessity for or expediency of the continuation of that restriction to the authority by whom it 
was ordered and, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that authority shall be obliged to act in 
accordance with any such recommendations. 


18 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Protection from deprivation of property. 

9. (1) No property of any description shall be com­ pulsorily taken possession of, and no interest in 
or right to or over property of any description shall be compulsorily acquired, except for public use 
and except in accordance with the provisions of a law applicable to that taking of posses­ sion or 
acquisition and for the payment of fair compensa­ tion within a reasonable time. 

(2) Every person having an interest in or right to or over property which is compulsorily taken 
possession of or whose interest in or right to or over any property is com­ pulsorily acquired shall 
have the right of access to the High Court for- 

(a) the determination of his interest or right, the legality of the taking of possession or 
acquisition of the property, interest or right and the amount of any com­ pensation to which he is 
entitled; and 

(b) the purpose of obtaining payment of that compensation: 

Provided that if Parliament so provides in relation to any matter referred to in paragraph (a) of this 
subsection the right of access shall be by way of appeal (exercisable as of right at the instance of 
the person having the interest in or right to or over the property) from a tribunal or authority, 
other than the High Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter. 

(3) The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice and procedure of the High Court or 
any other tribunal or authority in relation to the jurisdiction confer­ red on the High Court by 
subsection (2) of this section or exercisable by the other tribunal or authority for the pur­ poses of 
that subsection (including rules with respect to the time within which application or appeals to the 
High Court or applications to the other tribunals or authority may be brought). 

(4) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in con­ travention of subsection (1) of this section- 

(a) to the extent that the law in question makes provision for the taking of possession or acquisition 
of any property, interest or right- 


LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

19 

(i) in satisfaction of any tax, rate or due; 

(ii) by way of penalty for breach of the law or forfeiture in consequence of breach of the law; 

(iii) as an incident of a lease, tenancy, mortgage, charge, bill of sale, pledge or contract; 

(iv) in the execution of judgments or orders of a court in proceedings for the determination of civil 
rights or obligations; 

(v) in circumstances where it is reasonably necessary so to do because the property is in a dangerous 
state or likely to be injurious to the health of human beings, animals or plants; 

(vi) in consequence of any law with respect to the limitation of actions; 

(vii) for so long as may be necessary for the pur­ poses of any examination, investigation, trial or 
enquiry or, in the case ofland, for the pur­ poses of the carrying out thereon of work of soil 
conservation or the conservation of other natural resources or work relating to agricultural 
development or improvement (being work relating to such development or improvement that the owner or 
occupier of the land has been required, and has without reasonable excuse refused or failed, to carry 
out), 

and except so far as the provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority 
thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; 

(b) to the extent that the law in question makes provision for the taking of possession or acquisition 
of any of the following property (including any interest in or right to or over property), that is to 
say- 

(i) enemy property; 

(ii) property of a deceased person, a person of unsound mind or a person who had not attained the 
age of eighteen years, for the purpose of its administration for the benefit of the 


20 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Protection of person or property from arbItrary search 

or entry. 

persons entitled to the beneficial interest therein; 

(iii) the property of a person adjudged bankrupt or a body corporate in liquidation, for the purpose 
of its administration for the benefit ofthe creditors of the bankrupt or body corporate and, subject 
thereto, for the benefit of other persons entitled to the beneficial interest in the property; or 

(iv) property subject to a trust, for the purpose of vesting the property in persons appointed as 
trustees under the instrument creating the trust or by a court or by order of a court for the purposes 
of giving effect to the trust. 

(5) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law enacted by Parliament shall be held to 
be incon­ sistent with or in contravention of this section to the extent that the law in question 
makes provision for the compulsory taking of possession of any property, or the compulsory acquisition 
of any interest in or right to or over property, where that property, interest or right is held by a 
body cor­ porate established by law for public purposes in which no monies have been invested other 
than monies provided by Parliament or any legislature established for the former colony or Associated 
State of Antigua. 

(6) For the purposes ofthis section, "use" is "public" if it is intended to result or results in a 
benefit or advantage to the public and, without prejudice to its generality, includes any use 
affecting the physical, economic, social or aesthetic well-being of the public. 

10. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be subjected to the search of his person or his 
property or the entry by others on his premises. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in con­ travention of this section to the extent that the law in ques­ tion makes provision- 


lAWS OF ANTlGUAAND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

21 

(a) that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public 
morality, public health, public revenue, town and country plan­ ning or the development and 
utilization of property in such a manner as to promote the public benefit; 

(b) that authorises an officer or agent of the Government, a local government authority or a body 
corporate established by law for public purposes to enter on the premises of any person in order to 
inspect those premises or anything thereon for the purpose of any tax, rate or due in order to carry 
out work connected with any property that is lawfully on those premises and that belongs to the 
Government, or to that authority or body corporate, as the case may be; 

(c) that is reasonably required for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime; 

(d) that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; 
or 

(e) that authorises, for the purpose of enforcing the judgment or order of a court in any proceedings, 
the search of any person or property by order of a court or entry upon any premises by such order, 

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof 
is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 

11. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of 
conscience, and for the purposes of this section the said freedom includes freedom of thought and of 
religion, freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either along or in community with 
others, and both in public and in private, to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in 
worship, teaching, practice and observance. 

(2) Except with his own consent (or, if he is under the age of eighteen years, the consent of his 
parent or guardian) no person attending any place of education shall be required to receive religious 
instruction or to take part in or attend any religious ceremony or observance if that instruction, 
ceremony or observance relates to a religion other than his own. 

Protection of freedom of conscience. 
 

22 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Protection of freedom of expression including freedom of the press. 

(3) No person shall be compelled to take any oath which is contrary to his religion or belief or to 
take any oath in a manner which is contrary to his religion or belief. 

(4) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in contravention of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision that is 
reasonably required- 

(a) in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or 

(b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons, including the right to 
observe and practise any religion without the unsolicited intervention of members of any other 
religion, 

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof 
is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 

(5) Reference in this section to a religion shall be con­ strued as including references to a 
religious denomination, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly. 

12. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of 
expression. 

(2) For the purposes of this section the said freedom includes the freedom to hold opinions without 
interference, freedom to receive information and ideas without interference, freedom to disseminate 
information and ideas without interference (whether the dissemination be to the public generally or to 
any person or class of person) and freedom from interference with his correspondence or other means of 
communication. 

(3) For the purposes of this section expression may be oral or written or by codes, signals, signs or 
symbols and includes recordings, broadcasts (whether on radio or television), printed publications, 
photographs (whether still or moving), drawings, carvings and sculptures or any other means of 
artistic expression. 

(4) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in 


lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

Tbe Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

23 

contravention of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision- 

(a) that is reasonably required- 

in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or 

for the purpose of protecting the reputations, rights and freedoms of other persons, or the 

private lives of persons concerned in legal pro­ ceedings and proceedings before statutory tribunals, 
preventing the disclosure of infor­ mation received in confidence, maintaining the authority and 
independence of Parliament and the courts, or regulating telephony, posts, broadcasting or other means 
of communication, public entertainments, public shows; or 

(b) that imposes restrictions upon public officers that are reasonably required for the proper 
performance of their functions; 

(i) 

(ii) 

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof 
is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 

13. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of 
peaceful assembly and association, that is to say, his right peacefully to assembly freely and 
associate with other persons and in particular to form or belong to trade unions or other associations 
for the promotion and protection of his interests. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in con­ travention of this section to the extent that the law in ques­ tion makes provision- 

(a) that is reasonably required- 

in the interests of defence, public order, public morality or public health; or 

(ii) for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; or 

(i) 

Protection of freedom of assembly and association. 
 

24 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Protection from discrimination on the llrounds of race, sex, etc. 

(6) that imposes restrictions upon public officers that are reasonably required for the proper 
performance of their functions, 

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof 
is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 

14. (1) Subject to the provisions of subsec­ tions (4), (5) and (7) of this section, no law shall 
make any provision that is discriminatory either of itself or in its effect. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of subsections (6), (7) and (8) of this section, no person shall be 
treated in a discriminatory manner by any person acting by virtue of any law or in the performance of 
the functions of any public office or any public authority. 

(3) In this section, the expression "discriminatory" means affording different treatment to different 
persons attributable wholly or mainly to their respective descriptions by race, place of origin, 
political opinions or affiliations, colour, creed, or sex whereby persons of one such description 
are subjected to disabilities or restrictions to which persons of another such description are not 
made subject or are accorded privileges or advantages that are not accorded to persons of another such 
description. 

(4) Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to any law so far as the law makes provision- 

(a) for the appropriation of public revenues or other public funds; 

(b) with respect to persons who are not citizens; or (c) whereby persons of any such description as is 
mentioned in subsection (3) of this section may be sub­ jected to any disability or restriction or may 
be accorded any privilege or advantage that, having regard to its nature and to special 
circumstances pertaining to those persons or to persons of any other such description, is reasonably 
justifiable in a democratic society. 

( 5) Nothing contained in any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of 
subsection (1) of this section to the extent that it makes provision with respect to 

LAWS OF ANTIGllA AND BARBllDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

25 

qualifications (not being qualifications specifically relating to race, place of origin, political 
opinions or affiliations, colour, creed or sex) for service as a public officer or as a member of a 
disciplined force or for the service of a local government authority or a body corporate established 
by any law for public purposes. 

(6) Subsection (2) of this section shall not apply to anything that is expressly or by necessary 
implication authorised to be done by any such provision of law as is referred to in subsection (4) or 
(5) of this section. 

(7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of anv law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in con­ travention of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision whereby 
persons of any such description as is mentioned in subsection (3) of this section may be subjected to 
any restriction on . the rights and freedoms guaranteed by sections 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of this 
Constitution, being such a restriction as is authorised by paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (3) of 
section 8, subsec­ tion (2) of section 10, subsection (4) of section 11, subsec­ tion (4) of section 
12 or subsection (2) of section 13, as the case may be. 

(8) Nothing in subsection (2) of this section shall affect any discretion relating to the institution, 
conduct or discontinuance of civil or criminal proceedings in any court that is vested in any person 
by or under this Constitution or any other law. 

15. (1) If any person is charged with a criminal offence then, unless the charge is withdrawn, he 
shall be afforded a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court 
established by law. 

(2) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence- 

(a) shall .be presumed to be innocent until he is proved or has pleaded guilty; 

(b) shall be informed orally and in writing as soon as reasonably practicable, in language that he 
understands, of the nature of the offence with which he is charged; 

Provision to secure protection of the law. 

LAWS OF ANTIGlJAAND BARBlJDA 

26 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

(c) shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence; 

Cd) shall be permitted to defend himself before the court in person or by a legal practitioner of his 
own choice; 

(e) shall be afforded facilities to examine in person or by his legal representative the witnesses 
called by the prosecution before the court and to obtain the attendance and carry out the 
examination of witnesses to testify on his behalf before the court on the same conditions as those 
applying to witnesses called by the prosecution; and 

(j) shall be permitted to have without payment the assistance of an interpreter if he cannot
understand the language used at the trial of the charge, 

and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence- 

except where, under the provisions of any law entitling him thereto, he is given adequate notice of 
the charge, the date, time and place of the trial or continuance thereof and afforded a reasonable 
opportunity of appearing before the court: 

Provided that where the foregoing conditions have been complied with, and the court is satisfied 
that owing to circumstances beyond his control he cannot appear, the trial shall not take place or 
continue in his absence; or 

(ii) unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings-in his presence 
impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence. 

(i) 

(3) When a person is tried for any criminal offence the accused person or any person authorised by him 
in that behalf shall, if he so requires and subject to payment of such reasonable fees as may be 
prescribed by law, be given within a reasonable time after judgment a copy of any record of the 
proceedings made by or on behalf of the court. 


lAWS OF ANTlGUAAND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

27 

(4) No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal offence on account of any act or omission that 
did not, at the time it took place, constitute such an offence, and no penalty shall be imposed for 
any criminal offence that is more severe in degree or description than the maximum penalty that might 
have been imposed for that offence at the time when it was committed. 

(5) No person who shows that he has been tried by a competent court for a criminal offence and either 
convicted or acquitted shall again be tried for that offence or for any criminal offence of which he 
could have been convicted at the trial for the offence, save upon the order of a superior court in the 
course of appeal or review proceedings relating to the conviction or acquittal. 

(6) No person shall be tried for a criminal offence if he shows that he has been pardoned for that 
offence. 

(7) No person who is tried for a criminal offence shall be compelled to give evidence at the trial. 

(8) Any court or other authority prescribed by law for the determination ofthe existence or extent of 
any civil right or obligation shall be established by law and shall be independent and impartial; 
and where proceedings for such a determination are instituted by any persons before such a court or 
other authority, the case shall be given a fair hear­ ing within a reasonable time. 

(9) Except with the agreement of all parties thereto, all proceedings of every court and proceedings 
for the determination of the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation before any other 
authority, including the announcement of the decision of the court or other authority, shall be held 
in public. 

(10) Nothing in subsection (9) ofthis section shall prevent the court or other authority from 
excluding from the proceedings persons other than the parties thereto and the legal practitioners 
representing them to such an extent as the court or other authority- 


lAWS OF ANTTGUAAND BARBUDA 

28 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

(a) may by law be empowered to do and may con­ sider necessary or expedient in circumstances where 
publicity would prejudice the interests of justice or in interlocutory proceedings or in the interests 
of public morality, the welfare of persons under the age of eighteen years or the protection of the 
private lives of persons concerned in the proceedings; or 

(b) may by law be empowered or required to do in the interests of defence, public safety, public order 
or public morality. 

(11) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in contravention of- 

(a) subsection (2)(a) of this section, to the extent that the law in question imposes upon any person 
charged with a criminal offence the burden of proving particular facts; 

(b) subsection (2)(e) of this section, to the extent that the law in question imposes reasonable 
conditions that must be satisfied if witnesses called to testify on behalf of an accused person are to 
be paid their expenses out of public funds; or 

(c) subsection (5) of this section, to the extent that the law in question authorises a court to try a 
member of a disciplined force for a criminal offence notwithstanding any trial and conviction or 
acquittal of that member under the disciplinary law of that force so however, that any court so trying 
such a member and convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment take into account any 
punishment awarded him under that disciplinary law. 

(12) In the case of any person who is held in lawful detention, the provisions of subsection (1), 
paragraphs (d) and (e) of subsection (2), and subsection (3) of this section shall not apply in 
relation to his trial for a criminal offence under the law regulating the discipline of persons held 
in such detention. 

(13) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with 
or in 


LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBlJDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

29 

contravention of subsection (2) of this section to the extent that it authorises the trial of a defendant 
by a magistrate for a summary offence to take place in the defendant's absence. 

(14) In this section" criminal offence" means a criminal offence under any law. 

16. Nothing contained in or done under the authority of a law enacted by Parliament shall be held to 
be inconsis­ tent with or in contravention of section 5 or section 14 of this Constitution to the 
extent that the law authorises the' taking during any period of public emergency of measures that are 
reasonably justifiable, for dealing with the situation that exists in Antigua and Barbuda during that 
period. 

17. (1) When a person is detained by virtue of any such law as is referred to in section 16 of this 
Constitution the following provisions shall apply, that is to say- 

(a) he shall, with reasonable promptitude and in any case not more than seven days after the 
commencement of his detention, be informed in a language that he understands and in detail of the 
grounds upon which he is detained and furnished with a written statement in English specifying those 
grounds in detail; 

(b) not more than fourteen days after the com­ mencement of his detention a notification shall be 
published in the Official Gazette stating that he has been detained and giving particulars of the 
provision of law under which his detention is authorised; 

(c) not more than one month after the commence­ ment of his detention and thereafter during the 
detention at intervals of not more than six months, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and 
impartial tribunal established by law and presided over by a suitably qualified legal practitioner of 
at least seven years standing appointed by the Chief Justice; 

(d) he shall be afforded reasonable facilities to con­ sult a legal representative of his own choice 
who shall be permitted to make representations to the tribunal appointed for the review of the case of 
the detained per­ son; and 

Derogations from fundamental rights and freedoms under emergency powers. 

Protection of persons detained under emergency laws. 

30 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Enforcement of protective provisions. 

(e) at the hearing of his case by the tribunal appointed for the review of his case he shall be 
permitted to appear in person or by a legal practitioner of his own choice. 

(2) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of this section of the case of a detained person, the 
tribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or expe­ diency of continuing his detention 
to the authority by which it was ordered but, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that authority 
shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any such recommendations. 

(3) Nothing contained in subsection (1)(d) or subsec­ tion (1)(e) of this section shall be construed 
as entitling a per­ son to legal representation at public expense. 

18. (1) If any person alleges that any of the provi­ sions of sections 3 to 17 (inclusive) of this 
Constitution has been, is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him (or, in the case of 
a person who is detained, if any other person alleges such a contravention in relation to the detained 
person), then, without prejudice to any other action with respect to the same matter that is lawfully 
available, that person (or that other person) may apply to the High Court for redress. 

(2) The High Court shall have original jurisdiction­ (a) to hear and determine any application made by 
any person in pursuance of subsection (1) of this sec­ tion; and 

(b) to determine any question arising, in the case of any person that is referred to it in pursuance 
of subsec­ tion (3) of this section, 

and may make such declaration and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider 
appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of 
sections 3 to 17 (inclusive) of this Constitution: 

Provided that the High Court may decline to exercise its powers under this subsection if it is 
satisfied that ade­ quate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or 


lAWS OF ANTlGlJAAND BARBlJDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

31 

have been available to the person concerned under any other law. 

(3) If in any proceedings in any court (other than the Court of Appeal, the High Court or a 
court-martial) any question arises as to the contravention of any of the provi­ sions of sections 3 to 
17 (inclusive) of this Constitution, the person presiding in that court may, and shall if any party to 
the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the High Court unless, in his opinion, the raising 
of the question is merely frivolous or vexatious. 

(4) Where any question is referred to the High Court in pursuance of subsection (3) of this section, 
the High Court shall give its decision upon the question and the court in which the question arose 
shall dispose of the case in accord­ ance with that decision or, if that decision is the subject of an 
appeal to the Court of Appeal or to Her Majesty in Coun­ cil, in accordance with the decision of the 
Count of Appeal or, as the case may be, of Her Majesty in Council. 

(5) There shall be such provision as may be made by Parliament for conferring upon the High Court such 
powers in addition to those conferred by this section as may appear to be necessary or desirable for 
the purpose of enabling that court more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by 
this section. 

(6) The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice and procedure of the High Court in 
relation to the jurisdiction and powers conferred on it by or under this section (including rules with 
respect to the time within which applications may be brought and references shall be made to the High 
Court). 

19. Except as is otherwise expressly provided in this Constitution, no law may abrogate, abridge or 
infringe or authorise the abrogation, abridgement or infringement of any of the fundamental rights and 
freedoms of the individual hereinbefore recognised and declared. 

20. (1) The Governor-General may, by Proclamation which shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
declare 

Protection from derogations from fundamental rights and freedoms generally. 

Declaration of public emergency. 


lAWS OF ANTIGUAAND BARBUDA 

32 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

that a state of public emergency exists for the purposes of this Chapter. 

(2) Every declaration shall lapse- 

(a) in the case of a declaration made when Parliament is sitting, at the expiration of a period of 
seven days beginning with the date of publication of the declaration; and 

(b) in any other case, at the expiration of a period of twenty-one days beginning with the date of 
publica­ tion of the declaration, unless it has in the meantime been approved by resolutions of both 
Houses of Parliament. 

(3) A declaration of public emergency may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General by 
Proclamation which shall be published in the Official Gazette. 

(4) A declaration of public emergency that has been approved of by resolutions of the Houses of 
Parliament in pursuance of subsection (2) of this section shall, subject to the provisions of 
subsection (3) ofthis section, remain in force so long as the resolutions of those Houses remain in 
force and no longer. 

(5) A resolution of a House of Parliament passed for the purposes of this section shall remain in 
force for three months or such shorter period as may be specified therein: 

Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution each 
extension not exceeding three months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension and any 
such resolution may be revoked at any time by a resolution of that House. 

(6) Any provision of this section that a declaration of emergency shall lapse or cease to be in force 
at any par­ ticular time is without prejudice to the making of a further such declaration whether 
before or after that time. 

(7) A resolution of a House of Parliament for the pur­ poses of subsection (2) of this section and a 
resolution extending any such resolution shall not be passed unless it 


LAWS 0 F ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CA P. 23 Order 1981 

33 

is supported by the votes of a majority of all members of that House. 

(8) The Governor-General may summon the Houses of Parliament to meet for the purpose of subsection 
(2) of this section notwithstanding that Parliament stands dissolved, and the persons who were members
 of the Senate and the House immediately before the dissolution shall be deemed, for those purposes, 
still to be members of those Houses, but, subject to the provisions of sections 33 and 42 of this 
Constitution (which relate to the election of the President, Vice-President, the Speaker, and the 
Deputy Speaker) a House of Parliament shall not, when summoned by virtue of this subsection, transact 
any business other than debating and voting upon a resolution for the purposes of subsec­ tion (2) of 
this section. 

21. (I) Tn this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requrres+- 

.. contravention", in relation to any requirement, includes a failure to comply with that requirement, 
and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; 

"court" means any court oflaw having jurisdiction in Antigua and Barbuda other than a court 
established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in Council and, in section 4 of this 
Constitution, a court established by a disciplinary law; 

"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force; 

"disciplined force" means- 

(a) (b) (c) 

a naval, military or air force; the Police Force; or 

. . 

a pnson service; 

"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the 
discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline; 

Interpretation and savings.  

lAWS OF ANTlC UAAND BARBUDA 

34 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

"legal practitioner" means a person entitled to prac­ tise as a barrister in Antigua and Barbuda or, 
except in relation to proceedings before a court in which a solicitor has no right of audience, 
entitled to prac­ tise as a solicitor in Antigua and Barbuda. 

(2) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force raised under any law, nothing 
contained in or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be 
inconsistent with or in contraven­ tion of any of the provisions of this Chapter other than sections 
4, 6 and 7 of this Constitution. 

(3) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force raised otherwise than as 
aforesaid and lawful­ ly present in Antigua and Barbuda, nothing contained in or done under the 
authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 

(4) In this Chapter "public emergency" means any period during which- 

(a) Her Majesty is at war; or 

(b) there is in force a declaration of emergency under section 20 of this Constitution, or there are 
in force resolutions of both Houses of Parliament supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds 
of all the members of each House declaring that democratic institutions in Antigua and Barbuda are 
threatened by subversion. 

(5) A Proclamation made by the Governor-General shall not be effective for the purposes of section 20 
of this Constitution unless it contains a declaration that the Governor-General is satisfied- 

(a) that a public emergency has arisen as a result of the imminence of a state of war between Her 
Majesty and a foreign State or as a result of the occurrence of any earthquake, hurricane, flood, 
fire, outbreak of pestilence, outbreak of infectious disease or other calamity whether similar to 
the foregoing or not; or 

(b) that action has been taken or is immediately threatened by any person or body of persons of such 
 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

35 

a nature and on so extensive a scale as to be likely to endanger the public safety or to deprive the 
community, or any substantial portion of the community, of sup­ plies or services essential to life. 

CHAPTER III 

The Governor-General 

22. There shall be a Governor-General of Antigua and Barbuda who shall be a citizen appointed by Her 
Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall be Her Majesty's 
representative in Antigua and Barbuda. 

Establishment of office. 

23 . (1) During any period when the office of Governor-General is vacant or the holder of the office 
of Governor-General is absent from Antigua and Barbuda or is for any other reason unable to perform 
the functions of his office those functions shall be performed by such person as Her Majesty may 
appoint. 

Acting Governor­ General. 

(2) Any such person as aforesaid shall not continue to perform the functions of the office of 
Governor-General if the holder of the office of Governor-General has notified him that he is about to 
assume or resume those functions. 

(3) The holder of the office of Governor-General shall not for the purposes of this section, be 
regarded as absent from Antigua and Barbuda or as unable to perform the func­ tions of this office- 

(a) by reason that he is in passage from one part of Antigua and Barbuda to another; or 

(b) at any time when there is a subsisting appointment of a deputy under section 25 of this 
Constitution. 

24. A person appointed to hold or act in the office Oaths. of Governor-General shall, before entering 
upon the duties 

of that office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and 

the oath of office. 


36 

LAWS OF ANTIGlJAAND BARBl!DA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Deputy to Governor­ General. 

Public Seal. 

25. (I) When the Governor-General- 

(a) has occasion to be absent from the seat of government but not from Antigua and Barbuda; 

(b) has occasion to be absent from Antigua and Barbuda for a period that he considers, in his 
discretion, will be of short duration; or 

(c) is suffering from an illness that he considers, 

in his discretion, will be of short duration, 

he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Antigua and 
Barbuda to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf 
such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be specified in the instrument by which 
he is appointed. 

(2) The power and authority of the Governor-General shall not be abridged, altered or in any way 
affected by the appointment of a deputy under this section, and subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution, a deputy shall conform to and observe all instructions that the Governor-General, in his 
discretion, may from time to time address him: 

Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions 
shall not be enquired into by any court of law. 

(3) A person appointed as deputy under this section shall hold that appointment for such period as may 
be specified in the instrument by which he is appointed, and his appoint­ ment may be revoked at any 
time by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 

26. The Governor-General shall keep and use the Public Seal for sealing all things that shall pass 
under the Public Seal. 
 


CHAPTER IV 

37 

Parliament 

PART I 

Establishment and composition of Parliament 

27. There shall be a Parliament in and for Antigua and Barbuda which shall consist of Her Majesty, a 
Senate and a House of Representatives. 

The Senate 

28. (I) Th e Senate shall consist of seventeen persons who, being qualified for appointment as 
Senators in accor­ dance with the provisions of this Constitution, have been so appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this sec­ tion and such temporary members (if any) as may be 
appointed in accordance with the provisions of section 32 of this Constitution. 

(2) Ten Senators shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice of 
the Prime Minister. 

(3) Four Senators shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice of 
the Leader of the Opposition. 

(4) Subject to subsection (7) of this section, one Senator shall be appointed by the Governor-General 
in his discre­ tion from outstanding persons or persons representing such interests as the 
Governor-General considers ought to be represented in the Senate. 

(5) One Senator shall be appointed by the Governor­General acting in accordance with the advice of 
the Barbuda Council. 

(6) One Senator, being an inhabitant of Barbuda, shall be appointed by the Governor-General in 
accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 

(7) Before appointing any person representing interests under subsection (4) of this section the 
Governor-General 

Establishment of Parliament. 

Composition of the Senate. 

38 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Qualifications for appointment as Senators. 


shall consult such persons as in his discretion he considers can speak for the interests concerned and 
ought to be consulted. 

29. Subject to the provisions of section 30 of this Con­ stitution any person who at the age of his 
appointment- 

(a) is a citizen of the age of twenty-one years or upwards; 

(b) has resided in Antigua and Barbuda for a period of twelve months immediately preceding the date 
of his appointment; and 

(c) is able to speak and, unless incapacitated by blindness or other physical cause, to read the 
English language with sufficient proficiency to enable him to take an active part in the proceedings 
of the Senate. 

shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator. 

Disqualifications from appointment as Senators

30. (1) No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator who- 

(a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgement or allegiance, obedience or adherence to a 
foreign power or state; 

(b) is a member of the House; 

(c) is an undischarged bankrupt, having been declared bankrupt under any law; 

(d) is a person certified to be insane or otherwise adjudged to be of unsound mind under any law; 

(e) is under sentence of death imposed on him by a court or has been sentenced to imprisonment (by 
whatever name called) for a term of or exceeding twelve months and has not either suffered the 
punishment to which he was sentenced or such other punishment as may by competent authority have been 
substituted therefor, or received a free pardon; 

(f) is disqualified for election to the House by or under any law by reason of his connection with any 
offence relating to elections; 


lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBlJDA 

Tbe Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

39 

(g) holds or is acting in any public office or in the office of judge of the Supreme Court or 
Ombudsman, or is a member of the Constituencies Boundaries Com­ mission, the Judicial and Legal 
Services Commission, the Public Service Commission or the Police Service Commission; 

(h) has, within the period often years immediately preceding the proposed date of his appointment as a 
Senator, been convicted on indictment by a court of competent jurisdiction of theft, fraud or other 
such crime involving dishonesty and who- 

(i) has not appealed against that conviction; or (ii) has appealed against that conviction and whose 
appeal has not been allowed; and 

(iii) has not received a free pardon in respect of the offence; or 

(0 is a minister of religion. 

(2) Without prejudice to the prOVISIOns of subsection (1 )(g) ofthis section, Parliament may provide 
that a per­ son shall not be qualified for appointment as a Senator in any of the following cases- 

(a) if he holds or is acting in any office that is specified by Parliament and the functions of which 
involve responsibility for, or in connection with, the con­ duct of an election or the compilation or 
revision of any register of electors for the purposes of an election; 

(b) subject to any exceptions and limitations prescribed by Parliament, if- 

(i) 

he holds or is acting in any office or appoint­ ment prescribed by Parliament either individually or 
by reference to a class of office or appointment; 

(ii) he belongs to any armed force of Antigua and Barbuda or to any class of person that is 
comprised in any such force; or 

(iii) he belongs to the Police Force or to any class of person that is comprised in the Police Force. 


lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

40 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

(3) For the purpose of subsection (l)(e) of this section- 

(a) two or more sentences of imprisomnent that are required to be served consecutively shall be 
regarded as separate sentences if none of those sentences exceeds twelve months, but if anyone of such 
sentences exceeds that term they shall be regarded as one sentence; and 

(b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisomnent imposed as an alternative to or in default 
of the payment of a fine. 

Tenure of office of Senators. 

31. 

Senate- 

( 1) Every Senator shall vacate his seat in the 

(a) at the next dissolution of Parliament after he has been appointed; 

(b) if he is with his consent nominated as a can­ didate for election to the House; 

(c) if he ceases to be a citizen; 

(d) if he is absent from the sittings of the Senate for such period or periods and in such 
circumstances as may be prescribed by the rules of procedure of the Senate; 

(e) subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, if any circumstances arise that, if 
he were not a Senator, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such by virtue of 
subsection ( 1) of section 30 of this Constitution or of any law enacted in pursuance of subsection 
(2) of that section; 

(f) if the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister in the case of 
a Senator appointed in accordance with that advice, or in accordance with the advice of the Leader of 
the Opposition in the case of a Senator appointed in accordance with that advice, or in accordance 
with the advice of the Barbuda Council in the case of a Senator appointed in accordance with that 
advice, or in his discretion in the case of a Senator appointed by him in his discretion, declares the 
seat of that Senator to be vacant; or 

lAWS OF ANTIG UAAND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

41 

(g) if, having been appointed under the provisions of section 28(6) of this Consitution, he ceases to 
be an inhabitant of Barbuda. 

(2) (a) If circumstances such as are referred to in subsec­ tion (l)(e) of this section arise because 
a Senator is convicted of a felony or of any other offence involving dishonesty, sentenced to death or 
imprisonment, adjudged to be of unsound mind, or declared bankrupt or is convicted of any offence 
relating to elections in circumstances that disqualify him for election to the House, and if it is 
open to the Senator to appeal against the decision (either with the leave of a court or other 
authority or without such leave), he shall forthwith cease to perform his functions as a Senator but, 
subject to the provisions of this subsection, he shall not vacate his seat until the expiration of 
thirty days thereinafter: 

Provided that the President may, at the request of the Senator, from time to time extend that period 
for further periods of thirty days to enable the Senator to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, 
however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be 
given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Senate. 

(b) If on the determination of an appeal, such circumstances continue to exist and no further appeal 
is open to the Senator, or if, by reason of the expiration of any period for entering an appeal or 
notice thereof or the refusal of leave to appeal or for any other reason, it ceases to be open to the 
Senator to appeal, he shall forthwith vacate his seat. 

(c) If at any time before the Senator vacates his seat such circumstances as aforesaid cease to exist 
his seat shall not become vacant on the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph (a) of this 
subsection and he may resume the performance of his functions as a Senator. 

32. (1) Whenever a Senator is incapable of performing his functions as a Senator by reason of his 
absence from Antigua and Barbuda or by reason of his suspension under section 31 (2) of this 
Constitution or by reason of illness, the Governor-General may appoint a person qualified for 

Appointment of temporary Senators. 
 

42 

LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBlJDA CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

appointment as a Senator to be temporarily a member of the Senate during such absence, suspension or 
illness. 

(2) The provisions of section 31 of this Constitution shall apply to a member of the Senate appointed 
under this sec­ tion as they apply to a Senator appointed under section 28 of this Constitution and an 
appointment made under this section shall in any case cease to have effect if the person appointed is 
notified by the Governor-General that the cir­ cumstances giving rise to his appointment have ceased 
to exist. 

(3) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this section, the Governor-General shall act- 

(a) in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister in relation to a Senator appointed in 
pursuance of section 28(2) or 28(6) of this Constitution; 

(b) in accordance with the advice of the Leader of the Opposition in relation to a Senator appointed 
in pursuance of section 28(3) of this Constitution; 

(c) in his discretion in relation to a Senator appointed by him pursuant to section 28(4) of this 
Constitution; and 

(d) in accordance with the advice of the Barbuda Council in relation to a Senator appointed in 
pursuance of section 28(5) of this Constitution. 

President and Vice-President. 

33. (1) When the Senate first meets after any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch 
of any other business, it shall elect a Senator to be President, and if the office of President falls 
vacant at any time before the next dissolution of Parliament, the Senate shall, as soon as 
practicable, elect another Senator to be President. 

(2) When the Senate first meets after any general elec­ tion and before it proceeds to any other 
business except the election of the President, it shall elect a Senator to be Vice­ President: and if 
the office of Vice-President falls vacant at any time before the next dissolution of Parliament, the 
Senate shall, as soon as practicable, elect another Senator to be Vice-President. 


LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 On:ler 1981 

43 

(3) The Senate shall not elect a Senator who is a Minister or Parliamentary Secretary to be President 
or Vice-President. 

(4) No business (other than the election of a President) shall be transacted in the Senate at any time 
when the office of the President is vacant. 

(5) A person shall vacate the office of President or Vice-President - 

(a) if he ceases to be a Senator, except that the President shall not vacate his office by reason only 
that he has ceased to be a Senator on a dissolution of Parlia­ ment until the Senate first meets after 
that dissolution; or 

(b) if he is appointed to be a Minister or Parliamen­ tary Secretary or; 

(c) in the case of the Vice-President, ifhe is elected to be President. 

(6) (a) If, under section 31(2) of this Constitution, the person who is President or Vice-President is 
suspended from the performance of his functions as a Senator, he shall also cease to perform his 
functions as President or Vice-President, as the case may be, and those functions shall, until he 
vacates his seat in the Senate or resumes the performance of his functions as Senator, be performed- 

(i) 

in the case of the President, by the Vice­ President or if the office of Vice-President is vacant or 
the person who is Vice-President is suspended from the performance of his functions as a Senator 
under section 31(2) of this Constitution, by such Senator (not being a Minister or a Parliamentary 
Secretary) as the Senate may elect for the purpose; and 

(ii) in the case of the Vice-President, by such Senator (not being a Minister or Parliamentary 
Secretary) as the Senate may elect for the purpose. 

(b) If the President or Vice-President res urnes the performance of his functions as a Senator in 
accordance 
 

44 

LAWS OF ANTIGl!A AND BARBl!DA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Attendance of Attorney-General at proceedings of Senate. 

Attendance at proceedings of Senate of Ministers who are members of the House. 

Composition of the House. 

with the provisions of section 31(2) of this Constitution, he shall also resume the performance of his 
functions as President or Vice-President, as the case may be. 

34. The President, Vice-President or other member presiding in the Senate may request the 
Attorney-General to attend any proceedings of the Senate if he considers that 

the business before the Senate in those proceedings makes the presence of the Attorney-General 
desirable; and where he is so requested the Attorney-General may take part in the proceedings of the 
Senate solely for the purpose of giv­ ing explanations concerning matters before the Senate in those 
proceedings and he shall not vote in the Senate. 

35. (1) The President, Vice-president or other member presiding in the Senate may request a Minister 
who is a member of the House to attend any proceedings of the Senate if he considers that the business 
before the Senate in those proceedings falls within the portfolio of the Minister concerned and ifhe 
considers the presence of such Minister desirable. 

(2) A Minister who is so requested to attend any proceedings of the Senate may take part in the 
proceedings solely for the purpose of giving explanations concerning matters falling within his 
portfolio and he shall not vote in the Senate. 

The House of Representatives 

36. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the House shall consist of a number of elected 
members equal to the number of constituencies from time to time established by Order under Part 4 of 
this Chapter, who shall be elected in such a manner as may, subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution, be prescribed by or under any Act of Parliament. 

(2) If the person holding the office of Speaker is not otherwise a member of the House, he shall be a 
member of the House by virtue of holding that office. 

(3) If the person holding or acting in the office of Attorney-General is not otherwise a member of the 
House 
 

lAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

45 

he shall be a member of the House by virtue of holding or acting in that office but shall not vote in 
the House. 

37. (1) The Speaker, Deputy Speaker or other member presiding in the House may request a Minister who 
is a Senator to attend any proceedings of the House if he considers that the business before the House 
in those pro­ ceedings falls within the portfolio of the Minister concerned and if he considers the 
presence of such Minister desirable. 

(2) A Minister who is so requested to attend any pro­ ceedings of the House may take part in the 
proceedings solely for the purpose of giving explanations concerning matters falling within his 
portfolio and he shall not vote in the House. 

38. Subject to the provisions of section 39 of this Con­ stitution, any person who at the date of his 
election- 

(a) is a citizen of the age of twenty-one years or upwards; 

(b) has resided in Antigua and Barbuda for a period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of 
his election; and 

( c) is able to speak and, unless incapacitated by blindness or other physical cause, to read the 
English language with sufficient proficiency to enable him to take an .active part in the proceedings 
of the House, 

shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House. 

39. (1) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House who- 

(a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgement of allegiance, obedience or adherence to a 
foreign power or state; 

(b) is a Senator or temporary member of the Senate; 

(c) is an undischarged bankrupt, having been declared bankrupt under any law; 

(d) is a person certified to be insane or otherwise adjudged to be of unsound mind under any law; 

the House of Ministers who are Senators. 

Qualifications for election as a 

member of the House. 

Disqualifications from election as a member of the House. 

LAWS OF ANTIGlJA AND BARBlJDA 

46 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

(e) is under sentence of death imposed on him by a court or has been sentenced to imprisonment (by 
whatever name called) for a term of or exceeding twelve months and has not either suffered the 
punishment to which he was sentenced or such other punishment as may by competent authority have been 
substituted therefor, or received a free pardon; 

(j) is disqualified for appointment to the House by or under any law by reason of his connection with 
any offence relating to elections; 

(g) holds or is acting in any public office or in the office of judge of the Supreme Court or 
Ombudsman or is a member of the Constituencies Boundaries Commission, the Judicial and Legal 
Services Commission, the Public Service Commission or the Police Service Commission; 

(h) has, within the period often years immediately preceding the proposed date of his election as a 
member of the House, been convicted on indictment by a court of competent jurisdiction of theft, 
fraud, or other such crime involving dishonesty and who- 

(i) has not appealed against that conviction, or (ii) has appealed against that conviction and whose 
appeal has not been allowed; and 

(iii) has not received a free pardon in respect of the offence; or 

(i) is a minister of religion. 

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsec­ tion (1)(g) of this section, Parliament may 
provide that a per­ son shall not be qualified for election as a member of the House in any of the 
following cases- 

(a) if he holds or is acting in any office that is specified by Parliament and the functions of which 
involve responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of an election or the compilation or 
revision of any register of electors for the purposes of an election; 

(b) subject to any exceptions and limitations prescribed by Parliament, if- 


LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CAP. 23 Order 1981 

47 

(i) 

he holds or is acting in any office or appointment prescribed by Parliament either individually or 
by reference to a class of office or appointment. or 

(ii) he belongs to any armed force of Antigua and Barbuda or to any class of person that is comprised 
in any such force. 

(3) For the purpose of subsection (l)(e) of this section, 

(a) two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served consecutively shall be 
regarded as separate sentences if none of those sentences exceeds twelve months but if any of such 
sentences exceeds that term they shall be regarded as one sentence; and 

(b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment imposed as an alternative to or in default 
of the payment of a fine. 

40. (\) Each of the constituencies established in accordance with the provisions of section 62 of this 
Constitu­ tion shall return one member to the House who shall be directly elected in such manner as 
may, subject to the pro­ visions of this Constitution, be prescribed by or under any law. 

(2) Every Commonwealth citizen of the age of eighteen years or upwards who possesses such 
qualifications relating to residence or domicile in Antigua and Barbuda as Parlia­ ment may prescribe 
shall, unless he is disqualified by any law from registration as a voter for the purpose of electing a 
mem ber of the House, be entitled to be registered as such a voter in accordance with the provisions 
of any law in that behalf and no other person may be registered. 

(3) Every person who is registered as a voter in pur­ suance of subsection (2) of this section in any 
constituency shall, unless he is disqualified by any law from voting in that constituency in any 
election of members of the House, be entitled so to vote in accordance with the provisions of any law 
in that behalf. 

Election of members of the House. 
 

48 

lAWS OF ANTlGlIAAND BARBUDA 

CAP. 23) The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 

Tenure of seats of members of the House. 

(4) In any election of members of the House the votes shall be exercised freely and shall be given by 
secret ballot in such manner as Parliament may prescribe. 

41. (1) Every member of the House shall vacate his seat in the House- 

(a) at the next dissolution of Parliament after he has been elected; 

(b) if he ceases to be a citizen; 

(c) if he is absent from the sittings of the House for such period or periods and in such 
circumstances as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the House; 

(d) subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, if any circumstances arise that, if 
he were not a member of the House, would cause him to be disqualified from election as such by 
virtue of section 39(1) of this Constitution; or 

(e) if, having been elected to the House by virtue of being a member of a political party, he resigns 
his party whip and withdraws his allegiance from that party: 

Provided that he shall not be required to vacate his seat so long as he remains an independent member 
of the House. 

(2) (a) If circumstances such as are referred to in subsection (l)(d) of this section arise because 
a member of the House is convicted of a felony or of any other offence involving dishonesty, sentenced 
to death or imprisonment, adj udged to be of unsound mind, or declared bankrupt, or is convicted of 
any offence relating to elections in circumstances that disqualify him for election to the House, and 
if it is open to the member to appeal against the decision (either with the leave of a court or other 
authority or without such leave), he shall forthwith cease to perform his functions as a member of the 
House but, subject to the provision ofthis section, he shall not vacate his seat until the expiration 
of a period of thirty days thereafter: 

Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member from time to time, extend that period for 
further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an 
 

LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA 

The Antigua and Barbuda Constitution (CA P. 23 Order 1981 

49 

appeal against the deceision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one 
hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House. 

(b) If on the determination of any appeal, such circumstances continue to exist and no further 
appeal is open to the member, or if, by reason of the expiration of any period for entering an appeal 
or notice thereof or the refusal ofleave to appeal or for any other reason, it ceases to be open to 
the member to appeal, he shall forthwith vacate his seat. 

(c) Ifat any time before the member of the House vacates his seat such circumstances as aforesaid 
cease to exist, his seat shall not become vacant on the expiration of the period referred to in 
paragraph (a) of this subsection and he may resume the performance of his functions as a member of the 
House. 

(3) Where an elected member of the House vacates his seat in the House pursuant to the provisions of 
paragraph (b) to (e) of subsection (l) of this section or of subsection (2) of this section or where 
the seat of an elected member of the House is vacant for any other reason except a dissolution of 
Parliament, there shall be a by-election to fill the seat in the House vacated by that member and the 
by-election shall be held not later than one hundred and twenty days after the day on which the seat 
of the member of the House became vacant unless Parliament is sooner dissolved. 

42. (J) When the House first meets after any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch 
of any other business, it shall elect a person to be the Speaker; and if the office of Speaker falls 
vacant at any time before the next dissolution of Parliament the House shall, as soon as practicable, 
elect another person to that office. 

(2) The Speaker may be elected either from among the members of the House or from among persons who 
are not members of the House but are qualified to be elected as such. 

(3) When the House first meets after any general elec­ tion, and before it proceeds to any other 
business except the election of the Speaker, it shall elect a member of the House 

Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 

