
                                   1973  No.   1080 

              CARIBBEAN   AND   NORTH  ATLANTIC 
                                   TERRITORIES 

                 The  Bahamas  Independence  Order 1973 

                Made  -         -      -     -             20th  June  1973 
                Laid  before  Parliament                   26th  June  1973 
                Coming  into  Operation                     10th  July   1973 

          At the  Court  at  Windsor  Castle, the  20th day  of  June  1973 

                                          Present, 

                 The  Queen's  Most  Excellent  Majesty  in  Council 

 Her  Majesty,  by  virtue   and   in  exercise   of  the   powers   vested   in   Her 
 by   section    1  of   the  Bahama   Islands   (Constitution)  Act          1963(a)   and 
 of   all  other  powers   enabling  Her  in  that  behalf,   is  pleased,   by  and 
 with    the   advice   of   Her   Privy   Council,      to   order,   and   it   is  hereby 
 ordered,  as  follows: 

    1.-(1)  This  Order may  be  cited  as  The  Bahamas Independence  Citation 
 Order   1973.   
                                                                                                
    (2)   Subject  to  the   provisions   of  the  next   following   subsection   this    
 Order   shall   come   into     operation   on     10th   July    1973   (in  this   Order  
 referred  to  as  "the  appointed  day  "). 
    (3)  The  Governor   and  Commander-in-Chief   of  the  Bahama   Islands 
 may  at  any  time  after  20th  June  1973  exercise  any  of  the  powers  con- 
 ferred  on  the  Governor-General  by  section  4(3)  of  this  Order  or  Article 
 39(4)  of  the  Constitution  set  out  in  the  Schedule  to  this  Order  (in  this 
 Order  referred   to  as  "the     Constitution  ") to  such  an  extent  as  may  be 
 necessary   or  expedient  to  enable  the  Constitution  to  function   as  from 
 the  appointed  day. 

    (4)  (a) For  the   purposes       of   the   exercise   by   the   Governor   under 
subsection  (3) of  this  section  of  the  powers  conferred  by  section  4(3)  of 
this   Order   the  Governor  shall   act   in   accordance   with   the   advice  of 
the  Prime  Minister. 
   (b)  For  the  purposes  of  the  exercise  by  the  Governor  under  the  said 
subsection  of  the  powers  conferred  by  Article  39(4)  of  the  Constitution 
the   Governor   shall   act   in   accordance   with       the   advice   of  the   Prime 
Minister  after  consultation with  the Leader  of the  Opposition. 
   (c)  For   the   purposes     of   this   subsection   references      to   the   Prime 
Minister  and  Leader  of  the  Opposition  shall  be  construed  as  references 
to   the   persons   performing       the   functions   of   those    offices  under   the 

                                     
                  Bahama  Islands  (Constitution)  Order   1969(a)  (in  this  Order  referred  to 
                  as  "the   existing  Order "), and in relation to  the exercise  by virtue  of 
                  this  subsection  of  the  powers  conferred   by  Article  39(4) of the Consti- 
                  tution  the  provisions   of  Article 40 of the Constitution  shall apply as 
                  they  would  apply  in  relation to  the exercise of those powers by virtue 
                  of Article  39(4)  of  the  Constitution. 

                     (5)  Save  where   the   context  otherwise   requires, expressions used in 
                  sections     1 to   17  of  this Order shall have the same meaning as in the 
                  Constitution  and  the  provisions   of  Articles 127 and 137 of the Con- 
                  stitution  shall  apply for the purposes of interpreting those sections as 
                  they  apply  for  the  purposes  of  interpreting  the  Constitution. 

Revocation.          2. The  existing  Order is revoked; but  the  revocation  of  the  existing 
                  Order   shall  not  affect the  operation   on  and  after. the appointed day 
                  of   any   law   made  or   having   effect as if made in pursuance of  the 
                  existing  Order  or  continued  in   force  thereunder and  -having  effect as 
                  part  of the  law  of the  Bahama  Islands immediately  before  the appointed 
                  day  (including  any  law  made  before he  appointed  day  and  coming  into 
                  operation  on  or  after  that  day). 

Establish-           3.   Subject to the  provisions of  this   Order, the Constitution   shall 
ment  of          cone  into  effect   on  the  appointed  day. 
Constitution. 

Existing             4.--(1)   Subject  to  the provisions of this section, the   existing  laws 
laws.             shall  be  construed  with  such  modifications,   adaptations,   qualifications 
                  and  exceptions  as  may  be  necessary  to  bring  them  into  conformity  with 
                  the  Bahamas  Independence  Act  1973(b)  and  this  Order. 
                     (2)   Where   any  matter  that falls to be prescribed or otherwise pro- 
                  vided  for  under  the  Constitution  by  Parliament  or by  any  other  autho- 
                  rity   or  person   is  prescribed   or  provided  for by or under an existing 
                  law  (including  any  amendment  to  any  such law  made under  this  section) 
                  or  is   otherwise   prescribed or provided for immediately before the 
                  appointed      day   by    or  under   the  existing Order, that prescription or 
                  provision   shall,  as  from  that  day, have  effect (with  such modifications, 
                  adaptations,  qualifications  and  exceptions  as  may  be  necessary  to  bring 
                  it  into  conformity  with  the  Bahamas  Independence  Act   1973  and  this 
                  Order)  as  if  it  had  been   made  under  the  Constitution  by  Parliament 
                  or,  as  the  case  may  require,  by  the  other  authority  or  person. 

                     (3)  The  Governor-General  may  by   Order  made  at  any  time  before 
                   10th  July    1974  make   such  amendments   to  any   existing  law   as  may 
                  appear  to  him  to  be  necessary   or  expedient  for  bringing that law into 
                  conformity   with   the provisions of the Bahamas  Independence Act 
                   1973  and  this  Order  or otherwise for giving effect to or enabling effect 
                  to  be  given  to  those  provisions. 

                     (4)  An  Order  made  by  the  Governor-General  under  subsection  (3) of 
                  this   section    shall   have     effect   from such day, not earlier than the 
                  appointed  day,  as  may  be  specified  therein. 

                     (5)  The  provisions  of  this  section   shall  be  without  prejudice to any 
                  powers  conferred  by  this  Order  or  by  any  other  law  upon  any  person 
                  or  authority  to  make  provision  for any  matter, including  the  amendment 
                  or  repeal  of  any  existing  law. 

     (6)  In  this  section   "existing       law"    means   any  law  having   effect  as 
  part  of  the  law of  the  Bahama  Islands  immediately  before  the  appointed 
  day  (including  any  law made  before  the  appointed  day  and  coming  into 
  operation  on  or after  that  day). 

     5.-(1)  The  persons  who  immediately   before  the  appointed  day  are   Parliament. 
  members       of   the   Senate     established     by    the   existing  Order (in this 
  section  referred  to  as  " the  existing  Senate  "),  having  been  appointed  as 
  such    under   paragraphs        (a)   and   (b)   respectively      of   section 30(2) of 
  the  Schedule  to  the  existing  Order,  shall  as  from  the  appointed  day  be 
  members   of  the  Senate   established  by  the  Constitution   as  if  they  had 
  been   appointed   as   such  under   paragraphs   (2) and   (3)   respectively of 
  Article  39  of  the  Constitution  and  shall  hold  their  seats  as  Senators  in 
  accordance  with   the  provisions   of  the  Constitution. 

     (2)  The    persons  who immediately  before  the  appointed day are 
 members   of  the  House  of  Assembly               then  established  for  the  Bahama 
 Islands  (in  this  section  referred  to  as  "  the  existing  Assembly  ")  shall  as 
 from  the  appointed  day  be  members  of  the  House  of  Ass6mbly  estab- 
  lished  by  the  Constitution  as  if  elected  as  such  in  pursuance  of  Article 
 46(2)   of  the  Constitution   and  shall  hold   their  seats  in  that  House  in 
 accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution. 

    (3)  The   persons  who   immediately  before  the   appointed   day  are 
 Speaker  and   Deputy   Speaker  of  the   existing  Assembly   shall   as  from 
 the  appointed  day  be   Speaker  and  Deputy  Speaker  respectively   of  the 
 House   of   Assembly  established  by   the   Constitution   as  if   elected   as 
 such  by  that  House  in pursuance  of  Article  50(1)  of  the  Constitution  and 
 shall  hold   office    in  accordance       with  the  provisions        of   that  Article. 

    (4)   Any  person   who   is   a   member   of  the  Senate   or  the   House   of 
 Assembly   established   by   the   Constitution   by  virtue   of  the   preceding 
 provisions  of  this  section  and  who,  since  he was  last  appointed  or elected 
 as  a  member   of  the   existing  Senate   or  the   existing  Assembly   before 
 the   appointed   day,  has   taken   the   oath   of  allegiance   in   pursuance   of 
 section  45  of  the  Schedule  to  the  existing  Order  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
 complied      with    the    requirements       of   Article     64   of   the   Constitution 
 relating  to  the  taking  of the  oath  of  allegiance. 
    (5)  The  rules  of  procedure   of   the  existing   Senate  and   the   existing 
 Assembly       as   in  force    immediately   before  .the         appointed       day   shall, 
 except as may  be   otherwise  provided   in  pursuance  of  Article  55(1)   of 
 the  Constitution,  be  the  rules  of procedure  respectively  of  -the Senate  and 
 the  House  of  Assembly   established  by  the  Constitution,  but  they  shall 
be   construed  with   such   modifications,            adaptations,   qualifications         and 
exceptions  as  may  be  necessary  to  bring  them  into  conformity  with   the 
Constitution. 

   (6)   Notwithstanding         anything      contained       in   Article     66(3)    of   the 
Constitution   (but  subject  to  the  provisions   of  paragraphs   (4)                and  (5) 
of  that  Article)  Parliament  shall,  unless  sooner  dissolved,  stand  dissolved 
on   the   expiration   of   five  years   from       the   first   sitting   of  the   existing 
Assembly        after   the    general     election     of   members        of   the    existing 
Assembly  last  preceding  the  appointed  (lay. 

   (7)  For  the  purposes  of  Articles  41          and  47  of  the  Constitution   any 
period  of  ordinary  residence   in  -the Bahama  Islands  immediately  before 
the  appointed  day  shall  be  deemed  to  be  residence  in  The  Bahamas. 

 Ministers          6.--(1)    The  person  who  immediately  before  the  appointed  day  holds 
 and  Parlia-    the office of  Prime  Minister under the existing Order shall, as from the 
 mentary. 
 Secretaries,    appointed  day,  hold  office   as  Prime Minister  as if he had been appointed 
                 thereto  under  Article  73(1)  of  the'Constitution. 

                    (2)   The  persons   (other   than  the   Prime   Minister)  who immediately 
                  before   the  appointed  day  hold office  as  Ministers under  the  existing 
                 Order  shall,  as  from  the  appointed  day,  hold  the like  offices as if they 
                 had  been  appointed  thereto  under  Article  73(2)   of  the   Constitution. 
                     (3)  Any  person  holding the  office  of   Prime Minister  or  other Minister 
                  by  virtue  of  subsection  (1) or (2) of this section  who immediately before 
                  the  appointed  day  was   charged  with  responsibility   for  any  matter  or 
                  department  of government  shall,  as  from  the  appointed  day,  be  deemed 
                  to  have  been  charged  with  responsibility  for the  corresponding  business 
                 or  administration  of  the  corresponding  department  of  the  Government 
                 under  Article  77  of  the  Constitution. 
                    (4)   The persons  who  immediately  before  the  appointed  day  hold  office 
                 as   Parliamentary  Secretaries  under  the  existing Order shall, as from 
                 the  appointed  day,  hold  the  like  offices as if they had  been appointed 
                 thereto  under  Article  81(1)   of the  Constitution. 
                    (5) Any  person  who  holds  office  as  Prime  Minister  or  other  Ministei 
                 or  Parliamentary   Secretary  as  from  the  appointed  day  by  virtue  of  the 
                 provisions   of  this   section  shall  be   deemed to have complied  with  the 
                 requirements  of  Article  84  of  the  Constitution  relating to the taking  of 
                 oaths. 
Leader              7.  The  person who immediately before  the   appointed  day   is   the 
of the           Leader  of  the  Opposition  (as  defined  for  the  purposes of  the Schedule 
Opposition.      to   the  existing  Order)  shall, as from  the appointed  day, hold office as 
                 Leader  of  the  Opposition   as  if  he  had  been   appointed  thereto  under 
                 Article  82  of  the  Constitution. 
Existing            8.  Subject  to  the  provisions   of  this  Order  and of   the  Constitution, 
officers.        every  person  who  immediately  before  the  commencement  of  this  Order 
                 holds  or  is  acting  in  a public  office  shall, as from the commencement of 
                 this  Order,  continue  to  hold  or  act  in  the  like  office as if he had been 
                 appointed  thereto  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution. 
Supreme             9.-(1)  The  Supreme   Court  and  the  Court  of  Appeal   in   existence 
Court  and       immediately  before  the  appointed  day  shall,  as  from  the  appointed  day 
Court  of        be  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Appeal 
Judges.          Constitution  and  the  Chief  Justice  and the  Judges of the  Supreme  Court 
                 and  the  President  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  the  Justices   of  Appeal 
                 holding  office  immediately  before  that  day  shall,  as  from  that day, hold 
                 offices  as  Chief  Justice  or  Justices  of  the Supreme Court or President of 
                 the  Court  of  Appeal  or  Justices  of  Appeal,  as  the  case  may  be,  as if 
                 they  had  been  appointed  under  the  provisions   of  Chapter  VII  of  the 
                 Constitution. 
                    (2)  Any  proceedings  pending  before  the  Supreme  Court  immediately 
                 before   the  appointed  day  may  be-continued  and  any judgment  of  that 
                 Court  given  but  not  satisfied  before  that day may be enforced  as  if it 
                 were     the   judgment  of the  Supreme  Court  established   by   the 
                 Constitution. 
Pending             10.--(1)    Any  proceedings  pending  immediately  before  the  appointed 
appeals.         day  on  app~al  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  the  Court  of Appeal  for  the 
                 Bahama  Islands  may  be  continued  after  the  appointed  day  before  the 
                 Court  of Appeal  for  The  Bahamas  established  by  the  Constitution. 

    (2)   Any judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  for  the  Bahama  Islands  in 
 an  appeal  from  a  court  of  the  Colony  of  the   Bahama  Islands  given, 
 but  not  satisfied,  before  the  appointed  day  may  be  enforced  after  the 
 appointed  day   as  if  it  were  a  judgment           of   the  Court  of  Appeal   for 
 The  Bahamas  established  by  the  Constitution. 
    11.  A  court  of  appeal  for  the  Turks  and  Caicos  Islands  may,  under Exercise of 
 arrangements  between  the  Government  of that territory  and the  Govern-   
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                
 ment   of  The  Bahamas,  sit  in  The  Bahamas   and  exercise   
 jurisdiction     and  powers   in  respect       of   the  Turks   and   Caicos  Islands for Turks 
 as  may  be   conferred  upon  it  by   any  law  for  the  time  being  in  force   and  Caicos 
 in  the  Turks  and  Caicos  Islands.          Without  prejudice  to  the  generality   Islands. 
 of   the   foregoing,     persons   committed to custody in  the   Turks  and 
 Caicos  Islands  when  present   in  The  Bahamas  in  connection  with   any 
 proceedings   in   a  court  of  appeal   for  the   Turks   and   Caicos  Islands 
 may  be  held  in  custody  in  The  Bahamas  and  persons  may  be  committed 
 to  custody  in  The Bahamas  by  order  of such  a  court. 

    12.  Until  provision  is  made  under  and  in  accordance  with  Article  135   
 of  the  Constitution.  the  salaries  and  allowances  of  the  holders  of  each  
                                                                                                 
 of  the   offices   to  which   that  Article  applies,   other  than  the  Governor-  
 General,  shall  be  the  salaries  and  allowances   to  which  the  holders  of 
 each  of  those  offices  or of the  offices  corresponding  thereto  were  entitled 
 immediately  before   the  appointed   day,  and  the   salary  and  allowances 
 of  the  Governor-General   shall  be  -the salary  and  allowances   to  which 
 the   Governor   and   Commander-in-Chief   of   the   Bahama   Islands   was 
 entitled  immediately  before  such  day. 

    13.--(1)  Any   power   of  the   Governor   and   Commander-in-Chief of   
 the   Bahama   Islands        acting   on    the   recommendation  of the  Public  
 Service Commission established by the existing Order which has been relating  to 
                                                                                               
 validly  delegated  to  any  public  officer  under  that  Order  shall,  as  from    
 the  appointed  day,  be  deemed  to  have  been   delegated   to  that  public    
 officer   to  the   extent   that   that  power   could   be        so   delegated     
 Article   110  of  the  Constitution. 
    (2)  Any   matter   which, immediately  before   the   appointed day,  is 
 pending  before  an  existing  Commission  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  before 
 any  person   or  authority  on  whom  the  power  to  deal  with  such  matter 
 has  been  conferred  under  the  existing  Order  shall  as  from  the  appointed 
 day  be  continued  before  the  Public.  Service  Commission  established  by 
 the  Constitution,  or  the  Public  Service  Board  of Appeal,  or the  Judicial 
 and  Legal   Service  Commission,   or  -the Police  Service   Commission,   so 
 established  or,  as the case  may be,  the  said person  or  authority: 
   Provided      that  where   an   existing   Commission   or,  as  the   case may 
be,   any  person   or  authority   as  aforesaid  has,   immediately  before   the 
appointed  day, partly  completed  the hearing  of  a disciplinary  proceeding 
(in  this  section  referred   to  as  "the     original  hearing  "), no  person  shall 
take  part  in  the  continued  hearing  unless  he  has  also  taken  part  in  the 
original  hearing;   and  where  by  virtue  of   this  subsection   the  original 
hearing  cannot be  so  continued  the  hearing  of the  disciplinary  proceeding 
shall  be  recommenced. 
   (3)  A  person   who  immediately  before   the  appointed   day  holds  the 
office  of  Chairman  or  other  member   of  an  existing  Commission   shall, 
as  from  the  appointed  day,  continue  to  hold  the  like  office  as  if he  had 
been   appointed  thereto  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Con- 
stitution  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  duly  appointed  to  such office 
under  the  Constitution. 

     (4)  The  provisions        of  Articles     107(3),  114(3), 116(3) or    118(3),   as 
          the  case  may   be,  of  the  Constitution  shall  have  effect   in  relation   to 
          such   a  person   as   if  the  date   of  his  appointment  under the  existing 
          Order  were  the  date of his appointment under the  Constitution.     
     (5)  Until   Parliament        otherwise   prescribes        under   Article 117(2)   of 
          the    Constitution   the   public offices to  which  Article   117(1) thereof 
                    applies shall be the offices of Solicitor-General, Registrar of the Supreme 
                    Court,   Legal Draftsman,  Senior Crown  Counsel, Chief Magistrate, 
                   Registrar  General, Stipendiary  and  Circuit  Magistrate,  Crown  Counsel, 
                   Assistant      Legal  Draftsman,  Assistant Registrar, Deputy  Registrar 
                    General  and  Assistant  Crown  Counsel. 
                       (6)   In   this  section    "  an   existing   Commission " means the Public 
                   Service   Commission   established   under   the   existing  Order   or, as the 
                   case  may  be,  the  Public  Service  Board  of  Appeal,  or  the  Judicial  and 
                   Legal     Service     Commission, or  the Police Service Commission, so 
                   established. 

 Emergency             14.-(1)  The  Emergency   Powers   Order   in  Council  1939(a) and any 
 Powers            Order  in  Council   amending  that  Order(b) shall cease to have effect as 
 Order  in 
 Council          part  of  the  law  of The  Bahamas  on  10th  July   1974 or  such earlier date 
  1939.            as  Parliament  may  prescribe. 
                      (2)   Until   such   time  as the said Orders cease  to  have  effect under 
                   subsection (1) of this section they shall continue to have effect in respect 
                  of  The  Bahamas  as  they  had  effect  in  respect  of the  former  Colony  of 
                  the  Bahama  Islands  immediately  before  the  appointed  day,  except  that 
                  the  powers  exercisable  by  the  Governor  thereunder  shall  be  exercisable 
                  by   the  Governor-General  acting  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the 
                  Prime  Minister. 

Transfer  of         15.   All  sums  standing  to  the  credit  of  the  Crown   Lands  Fund  for 
Crown  Lands      Development  immediately  before  the  appointed  day  shall  as  from  that 
Fund  for 
Development       day  form  part  of  the  Consolidated  Fund,  and  all  sums  charged  on  the 
to                Crown  Lands  Fund  for  Development  immediately  before  that  day  shall 
Consolidated      as  from  that  day  stand  charged  on the  Consolidated  Fund. 
Fund. 
Transitional          16.  Any  compensation,  gratuity,  grant  or  allowance  paid  or  payable, 
provisions        whether  before  or  after  the  appointed  day,  under  any  regulations  made 
relating  to      by  the  Governor  under  section  15  of the  Bahama  Islands  (Constitution) 
compensation 
etc.              Oirder    in   Council   1963(c)   or  under   section   9 of the Bahama Islands 
                  (Constitution)  Order   1969,   which  under  those  regulations   as  in  force 
                  immediately  prior  to  the  appointed  day  was  or  would  have  been  exempt 
                  from  tax  in  the  Bahama  Islands,  shall  be  exempt from  tax to the same 
                  extent  in  The  Bahamas  after  the  appointed  day. 

Alteration           17.-(1)   Parliament  may   alter   any  of the provisions of this Order- 
of this           (in  so  far  as  those  provisions  form  part  of  the  law  of  The  Bahamas), 
Order,            other  than  those  mentioned   in   subsections  (2) and  (3) of  this section, 
                  in  the  same  manner  as  it  may  alter  the  provisions   of  the  Constitution 
                  other  than  those  specified  in  paragraphs  (2)   and  (3) of Article 54 of 
                  the  Constitution. 
                   (a)  See  S.I..1952  I  at p.  621. 
                   (b) The relevant amending instruments are S.I. 1956/731, 1963/88, 1633, 1964/267, 
                  1199,  1965/131, 1968/724, 1973/759 (1956 1,p.512; 1963 I,  p.105; III, p.3084; 
                  1964 I,  p.  467,  II, p.2781; 1965 I, p.270; 1968 II, p.2077; 1973 I, p.2417). 
                   (c) S.I.196312084 (1963   III, p. 4403). 

   (2)   Parliament  may  alter  subsection  (6)  of  section  5  of  this  Order  and 
this  section  in  the  same  manner  as  it  may  alter  the  provisions  specified 
in  Article  54(3)  of  the  Constitution. 

   (3)  Parliament  may   alter  sections  8.           9,  12,  subsections   (3),     (4)   and 
(5)  of  section  13  and  section  16  of  this  Order  in  the  same  manner  as  it 
may  alter  the  provisions  specified  in  Article  54(2)  of  the  Constitution. 

   (4)  In   this   section     "alter"     has   the   same   meaning         as   in   Article 
54(4)(b)  of  the  Constitution. 

                         SCHEDULE TO  THE  ORDER 
                        THE  CONSTITUTION  OF THE 
                 COMMONWEALTH   OF  THE  BAHAMAS 

                      ARRANGEMENT  OF  ARTICLES 

                                     CHAPTER  I 

                                 THE   CONSTITUTION 
Article 
1.   The  State. 
2.   The  Constitution  is  supreme  law. 

                                    CHAPTER   11 

                                      CITIZENSHIP 

3.   Persons  who  become  citizens  on  10th July  1973. 
4.   Persons  who  become  citizens  on  9th July  1974. 
5.   Persons  entitled  to  be  registered  as  citizens. 
6.   Persons  born  in  The Bahamas  after  9th  July  1973. 
7.   Persons  born  in  The  Bahamas  after  9th  July  1973  of non-citizen 
          parents. 
8.   Persons  born  outside  The  Bahamas  after 9th  July  1973. 
9.   Further  provisions   for  persons  born  outside  The  Bahamas   after 
          9th  July  1973. 
10.  Marriage  to  citizens  of The  Bahamas. 
11.  Deprivation  of citizenship. 
12.  Renunciation  of citizenship. 
13.  Power of Parliament. 
14.  Interpretation. 

                                   CHAPTER  III 

                 PROTECTION      OF   FUNDAMENTAL       RIGHTS  AND 

                         FREEDOMS   OF   THE   INDIVIDUAL 

15.    Fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  of the individual. 
16.    Protection  of right  to  life. 
17.    Protection  from  inhuman  treatment. 
18.    Protection  from  slavery  and  forced  labour. 
19.    Protection  from  arbitrary  arrest  or  detention. 
20.    Provisions  to  secure  protection  of law. 
21.    Protection  for  privacy  of home  and  other  property. 
22.    Protection  of freedom  of conscience. 
23.    Protection  of freedom  of expression. 
24.    Protection  of freedom  of assembly-and  association. 
25.    Protection  of freedom  of movement. 
26.    Protection  from  discrimination  on  the  grounds  of race,  etc. 
27.    Protection  from  deprivation  of property. 
28.    Enforcement  of fundamental  rights. 
29.    Provisions  for time  of war  or emergency. 
30.    Saving  of existing  law. 
31.    Interpretation. 

                                   CHAPTER  IV 

                            THE   GOVERNOR-GENERAL 
Article 
32.    Establishment  of office  of Governor-General. 
33.    Acting  Governor-General. 
34.    Deputy  to  Governor-General. 
35.    Personal  staff of Governor-General. 
36.    Public  Seal. 
37.    Oaths  to  be  taken  by  Governor-General. 

                                   CHAPTER  V 

                                    PARLIAMENT 

                                       PART    1 

                            Composition  
                                           of Parliament 
38.    Establishment  of Parliament. 

                                       PART   2 

                                     The Senate 
39.    Composition  of Senate. 
40.    Purpose  of appointment  of certain  Senators. 
41.    Qualifications  for appointment  as  Senator. 
42.    Disqualifications  for  appointment  as  Senator. 
43.    Tenure  of  office  of Senators. 
44.    President  and  Vice-President. 
45.    Determination  of questions  as  to  membership. 

                                      PART    3 

                                House of Assembly 
46.    Composition  of House  of Assembly. 
47.    Qualifications  for membership  of House  of Assembly. 
48.    Disqualifications  for election  as  members  of House  of Assembly. 
49.    Tenure  of office  of members  of House  of Assembly. 
50.    Speaker  and  Deputy  Speaker. 
51.    Determination  of questions  as  to  membership. 

                                      PART  4 

                     Powers and  
                                   Procedure of  
                                                   Parliament 
52.    Power  to  make  laws. 
53.    Privileges  of Parliament. 
54.    Alteration  of this  Constitution. 
55.    Regulation  of procedure  in Parliament. 
56.    Presiding  in  the  Senate  and  House  of Assembly. 
57.    Quorum. 
58.    Voting.                                               

Article 
 59.    Introduction  of Bills,  etc. 
 60.    Restriction  on  powers  of Senate  as  to  Money  Bills. 
 61.    Restriction  on powers  of Senate  as  to  Bills  other  than  Money  Bills. 
 62.    Provisions  relating  to  Articles  59,   60  and  61. 
 63.    Assent  to  Bills. 
 64.    Oath  of  allegiance. 

                                         PART   5 

                    Summoning, Prorogation and. Dissolution 
 65.    Sessions  of Parliament. 
 66.    Prorogation  and  dissolution  of Parliament. 
 67.    General  elections,  bye-elections  and  appointment  of  Senators. 
                                         PART   6 

                           Delimitation  of Constituencies 
 68.    Constituencies. 
 69.    Constituencies  Commission. 
 70.    Procedure  for review  of constituencies. 

                                    CHAPTER  VI 

                                    THE  EXECUTIVE 

71.    Executive  Authority. 
 72.   The  Cabinet. 
 73.   Appointment  of Ministers. 
 74.   Tenure  of office  of Ministers. 
 75.   Performance  of functions  of Prime  Minister  during  absence,  illness 
          or suspension. 
 76.   Temporary  Ministers. 
 77.   Allocation  of portfolios  to Ministers. 
 78.   Functions  of Attorney-General. 
 79.   Exercise  of Governor-General's  powers. 
 80.   Governor-General  to  be  informed  concerning  matters  of Govern- 
          ment. 
81.    Parliamentary  Secretaries. 
82.    Leader  of the  Opposition. 
83.    Certain  vacancies  in  office  of Leader  of the  Opposition. 
84.    Oaths to  be  taken  by  Ministers,  etc. 
85.    Leave  of absence  for  Ministers,  etc.- 
86.    Summoning of and  presiding  in  Cabinet. 
87.    Quorum. 
88.    Permanent  Secretaries. 
89.    Constitution  of offices,  etc. 
90.    Powers  of.lpardon,  etc. 
91.    Advisory  Committee  on  Prerogative  of Mercy. 
92.    Functions  of Advisory  Committee. 
                                    CHAPTER  VII 
                                   THE  JUDICATURE 

                                         PART    1 

                                  The Supreme  Court 
 Article 
  93.   Establishment  of Supreme  Court. 
  94.   Appointment  of Justices  of  Supreme  Court. 
  95.   Acting Justices. 
  96.   Tenure  of office  of Justices  of Supreme  Court. 
  97.   Oaths  to  be  taken  by  Justices  of Supreme  Court. 

                                         PART  2 

                                    Court of Appeal 
  98.   Establishment  of Court  of Appeal. 
  99.   Justices  of the  Court  of Appeal. 
 100.   Other  arrangements  for  appeals. 
 101.   Acting  Justices  of Court  of Appeal. 
 102.   Tenure  of office  of Justices  of Appeal. 
 103.   Oaths to  be  taken  by Justices  of Appeal. 

                                         PART  3 

           Appeals  to  Court of Appeal and Her Majesty  in  Council 
 104.   Appeals  relating to  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms. 
 105.   Appeals  to  Her  Majesty  in  Council  in other  cases. 
 106.   Interpretation  of "  Court  of Appeal." 

                                   CHAPTER  VIII 

                                THE   PUBLIC   SERVICE 

                                        PART    I 

                          The Public Service  Commission 
107.    Establishment  and  composition  of Public  Service  Commission. 

                                        PART   2 

                       Appointments  etc.  of Public Officers 
108.   Appointments,  etc.  of public  officers. 
109.   AppLintments  of  Permanent  Secretaries   and  certain   other  public 
           officers. 
110.   Delegation  of  Governor-General's  powers. 
111.   Appointments,  etc.   of  principal   representatives   of The  Bahamas 
          abroad. 
112.   Appointments  on  transfer in  respect  of certain  offices. 
113.   Appointment  of Secretary  to  the  Cabinet. 

                                          PART  3 

                         The Public Service  Board of Appeal 
  Article 
  114.   Public  Service Board  of Appeal. 
  115.   Appeals  in  discipline  cases. 

                                          PART  4 

                    The Judicial and Legal  Service Commission 
  116.   Establishment  and  composition  of the  Judicial  and  Legal  Service 
            Commission. 
  117.   Appointments,  etc.  of judicial  and  legal  officers. 

                                          PART   5 

                           The Police  Service  Commission 
  118.   Establishment  and  composition  of the  Police  Service  Commission. 
  119.   Appointment  of  Commissioner  of Police  and  other  officers  of the 
            Police  Force. 
 120.    Removal  of the  Commissioner and Deputy  Commissioner of Police. 
 121.    Removal  and  discipline  of members  of the  Force. 

                                         PART   6 

                                        Pensions 
 122.    Protection  of pension  rights. 
 123.    Grant  and  withholding  of pensions,  etc. 
 124.   Appeals  in  respect  of certain  decisions  affecting  pensions  benefits. 

                                         PART   7 

                                     Miscellaneous 
 125.   Procedure  of Commissions. 
 126.   Removal  from  office  of certain  persons. 
 127.   Public  Service. 

                                    CHAPTER  IX 

                                        FINANCE 

 128.   Consolidated  Fund. 
 129.   Estimates. 
 130.   Authority  for public  expenditure. 
 131.   Withdrawal  of money  from  the  Consolidated  Fund. 
 132.   Withdrawal  of money  in advance  of Appropriation  Act. 
133.    Contingencies  Fund. 
 134.   Public  Debt. 
135.    Remuneration  of  Governor-General  and  certain  other  officers. 
 136.   Establishment  of office  and  functions  of Auditor-General. 

                                    CHAPTER  X 

                                   INTERPRETATION 
137.    Interpretation. 

                       THE  CONSTITUTION   OF  THE       
                 COMMONWEALTH   OF  THE  BAHAMAS 

 WHEREAS      Four  hundred   and  eighty-one   years   ago   the  rediscovery   of 
 this   Family  of  Islands,   Rocks      and   Cays   heralded   the   rebirth   of   the 
 New  World; 

    AND   WHEREAS  the  People  of  this  Family  of  Islands  recognise  that  the 
 preservation    of  their  Freedom  will  be  guaranteed  by   a  national   com- 
 mitment   to    Self-discipline,   Industry,    Loyalty,   Unity     and   an   abiding 
 respect  for  Christian  values  and  the  Rule  of  Law; 

 Now  KNOW  YE  THEREFORE: 

 We  the  Inheritors  of  and  Successors  to  this  Family  of  Islands,  recognis- 
 ing  the  Supremacy  of  God  and  believing  in  the  Fundamental  Rights  and 
 Freedoms   of  the  Individual,   Do  HEREBY         PROCLAIM     IN SOLEMN      PRAISE 
 the  Establishment  of  a  Free  and  Democratic  Sovereign  Nation  founded 
 on  Spiritual  Values  and  in  which  no  Man,  Woman  or  Child  shall  ever 
 be   Slave   or  Bondsman  to   anyone   or  their   Labour  exploited  or  their 
 Lives   frustrated    by   deprivation,   AND     DO   HEREBY     PROVIDE     by   these 
 Articles   for   the   indivisible   Unity    and   Creation     under    God   of   the 
 Commonwealth  of  The  Bahamas. 

                                    CHAPTER  I 

                                 THE   CONSTITUTION 

    1.  The    Commonwealth  of   The  Bahamas shall   be   a   sovereign   The  State. 
 democratic  State. 

   2.  This  Constitution is  the  supreme  law  of the  Commonwealth  of  The    
 Bahamas      and,   subject  to  the   provisions     of  this   Constitution,  if   any  
                                                                                            
 other  law  is  inconsistent  with  this  Constitution,   this  Constitution,  shall  law. 
 prevail  and  the  other  law  shall,  to  the  extent  of  the  inconsistency,  be 
void. 

                                    CHAPTER  II 

                                     CITIZENSHIP 

   3-(1)  Every  person  who,  having  been  born  in  the  former  Colony  of   
the  Bahama  Islands,  is  on  9th  July  1973  a  citizen  of  the  United  King-   
dom  and  Colonies  shall  become  a citizen  of  The  Bahamas  on  10th  July   
1973.                                                                                       

   (2)  Every  person  who,  having  been  born  outside  the  former  Colony 
of  the  Bahama   Islands,  is  on  9th  July   1973   a  citizen   of  the  United 
Kingdom  and  Colonies  shall,  if  his  father  becomes  or would  but  for his 
death  have  become  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of the preceding  paragraph, become  a citizen  of The Bahamas 
on  10th July  1973. 

   (3)  Every  person   who  on  9th  July        1973   is   a   citizen   of  the  United 
Kingdom  and  Colonies  having  become   such  a  citizen  under  the  British 
Nationality  Act      1948  by  virtue   of  his  having   been   registered   in  the 
former  Colony  of  the  Bahama  Islands  under   that  Act  shall  become   a 
citizen  of  The Bahamas  on  10th July  1973:     

                      Provided  that  this  paragraph shall not apply to any citizen of the 
                   United  Kingdom  and Colonies- 
                      (a)  who  was  not  ordinarily  resident  in  that  Colony  on  31st  December 
                         1972,  or 
                      (b)  who  became  registered   in  that  Colony   on  or  after 1st  January 
                         1973,  or 
                      (c)  who  on  9th  July   1973  possesses  the  citizenship or nationality  of 
                         some  other  country. 
 Persons  who         4.   Every   person  who on 9th July 1973 is  a  citizen   of  the  United 
 become           Kingdom and Colonies- 
 citizens  on         n 
 9th July             (a) having  become such  a  citizen  under  the  British  Nationality  Act 
 1974.                   1948  by  virtue  of his  having  been  naturalised  in  the  former  Colony 
                         of  the  Bahama  Islands  before  that Act  came  into  force  ; or 
                     (b)  having  become   such  a  citizen  by  virtue  of  his  having  been natur- 
                         alised  in  the  former  Colony  of  the  Bahama  Islands  under that Act, 
                  shall  become        a   citizen   of   The   Bahamas   on   9th  July 1974, unless, 
                  prior  to  that  date,  he  has  in  such  manner  as may  be  prescribed  declared 
                  that  he  does  not  desire  to  become   a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas: 
                     Provided  that  this  section   shall  not  apply  to  a  citizen  of the United 
                  Kingdom   and  Colonies  who  on  9th  July   1973  possesses  the  citizenship 
                  or nationality  of  some  other country. 
Persons              5.-(1)  Any  woman  who,  on  9th  July   1973,   is  or  has  been  married 
entitled  to be   to  a person- 
registered 
as  citizens.        (a)  who  becomes a  citizen   of  The  Bahamas  by  virtue   of  Article  3 
                        of  this  Constitution  ;  or 
                     (b)  who,  having  died  before  10th  July  1973,  would,  but  for his  death, 
                        have  become  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  by  virtue  of  that  Article, 
                  shall  be  entitled,  upon  making  application  and upon  taking  the  oath  of 
                  allegiance  or  such  declaration  in  such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed,  to 
                 be  registered  as  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas           : 

                     Provided  that  the  right  to  be  registered  as  a citizen  of  The  Bahamas 
                 under  this  paragraph  shall  be  subject to  such  exceptions  or  qualifications 
                  as  may be prescribed in the  interests  of national security or public 
                 policy. 
                     (2)  Any   person  who,  on  9th  July   1973,   possesses   Balamian   Status 
                  under  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Act   1967(a)  and  is  ordinarily 
                  resident  in  the  Bahama  Islands,  shall  be  entitled,  upon  making  applica- 
                  tion  before  10th July  1974, to  be  registered  as  a citizen  of  The  Bahamas. 
                     (3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in  paragraph (2) of this 
                  Article,   a  person  who   has  attained  the   age  of  eighteen  years  or  who 
                 is  a  woman  who  is  or  has  been  married  shall  not,  if  he  is -a citizen of- 
                  some country  other  than  The  Bahamas,  be  entitled  to  be  registered  as  a 
                 citizen  of  The  Bahamas  under  the  provisions  of  that  paragraph   unless 
                 he  renounces   his  citizenship  of  that  other  country,  takes   the  oath   of 
                  allegiance    and  makes   and  registers   such   declaration   as   may  be  pre- 
                  scribed: 
                    Providepd   that  where  a  person  cannot  renounce  his  citizenship  of  the 
                  other country  under  the  law  of  that  country  he may  instead  make  such 
                 declaration  concerning  that  citizenship  as  may  be  prescribed. 

     (4)  Any     application      for   registration      under   paragraph  (2) of this 
  Article  shall  be  subject  to  such  exceptions  or  qualifications   as  may  be 
  prescribed  in  the  interests  of  national  security  or  public  policy. 
     (5) Any  woman  who  on  9th  Judy   1973  is  or  has  been  married  to  a 
  person  who  subsequently  becomes   a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  by  regis- 
  tration   under   paragraph         (2)   of   this   Article   shall   be   entitled,   upon 
  making   application   and  upon   taking   the  oath  of  allegiance   or  such 
  declaration  as  may  be  prescribed,  to  be  registered  as  a  citizen  of  The 
  Bahamas: 
    Provided  that  the  right  to  be  registered  as  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas 
  under  this  paragraph  shall  be  subject  to  such  exceptions  or qualifications 
 as   may  be   prescribed   in  the   interests         of  national     security   or  public 
 policy. 
     (6)   Any  application  for  registration  under  this  Article  shall  be  made 
 in  such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed   as  respects  that  application: 
    Provided  that  such  an  application  may  not  be  made  by  a person  who 
 has  not  attained  the  age  of  eighteen  years  and  is  not  a  womqn  who  is 
 or  has  been  married,  but  shall  be  made  on  behalf  of  that  person  by  a 
 parent  or  guardian  of  that  person. 

    6.  Every  person  born  in  The  Bahamas   after  9th  July   1973  shall  be-  Persons 
 come  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  at  the  date  of  his  birth  if  at  that  date  born  in 
                                                                                                     
 either of  his  parents  is  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas.                                           
                                                                                                     
    7.-41)  A  person  born  in  The  Bahamas   after  9th  July   1973  neither   Persons born  in 
 of  whose  parents  is   a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas   shall  be  entitled,  upon   The Bahamas 
 making  application  on  his  attaining  the  age  of  eighteen  years  or  within  after  9th 
 twelve  months  thereafter in such manner as may  be prescribed, to  be July 1973 of non-citizen 
    Provided      that   if  he   is  a  citizen    of  some   country   other   than  The 

 Bahamas  he  shall  not  be  entitled  to  be  registered  as  a  citizen   of  The 
 Bahamas  under  this  Article  unless  he  renounces  his  citizenship  of  that 
 other  country,  takes  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  makes  and  registers  such 
 declaration  of  his  intentions  concerning  residence  as  may  be  prescribed. 

    (2)   Any  applicatiun  for registration  under  this  Article  shall  be  subject 
 to  such  exceptions  or qualifications  as  may  be  prescribed  in  the  interests 
of  national  security  or  public  policy. 

    8.  A  person  born  outside  The  Bahamas  after  9th  July  1973  shall  be-                   
come   a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  at  the   date  of  his  birth  if  at  that  date  
                                                                                                     
his  father  is  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  otherwise  than  by  virtue  of  this   after  9th 
Article  or  Article  3(2)  of  this  Constitution.                                                 

    9.--(1)   Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  Article  8  of  this  Con-    
stitution,  a person  born  legitimately  outside  The  Bahamas'after  9th July    
 1973  whose  mother  is  a citizen  of The  Bahamas  shall  be  entitled,  upon    
                                                                                                     
making  application  on  his  attaining  the  age  of eighteen  years  and  before   
he  attains  the  age  of twenty-one  years,  in  such  manner  as  may  be  pre-   
scribed,  to  be  registered  as  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas:                                      
   Provided   that   if  he   is   a  citizen   of   some   country   other   than  The 
Bahamas. he   shall  not  be  entitled  to  be  registered   as  a  citizen  of  The 

                  Bahamas  under  this  Article  unless  he  renounces  his  citizenship  of  that 
                  other country,  takes  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  makes  and  registers  such 
                  declaration  of his  intentions  concerning  residence  as  may  be  prescribed. 

                     (2)   Where   a   person   cannot  renounce  his  citizenship   of  some  other 
                  country  under   the   law  of   that  country,  he   may instead  make such 
                  declaration   concerning   that   citizenship   as  may   be  prescribed. 

                     (3)  Any  application  for  registration   under  this  Article shall be  sub- 
                 ject   to  such   exceptions   or  qualifications   as  may  be  prescribed in the 
                  interests  of  national  security  or  public  policy. 

 Marriage  to        10.  Any  woman  who,  after  9th  July  1973,  marries  a  person  who  is  or 
 citizens  of 
The               becomes   a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas   shall  be  entitled,  provided   she  is 

 Bahamas.         still  so  married,  upon  making   application   in  such  manner  as  may  be 
                  prescribed   and  upon  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance   or  such  declaration 
                  as  may  be  prescribed,   to  be  registered   as   a  citizen   of  The  Bahamas: 

                    Provided  that  the  right  to  be  registered  as  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas 
                 under  this  Article  shall  be  subject  to  such  exceptions  or  qualifications 
                 as  may  be prescribed in the interests of  national security or public 
                 policy. 

Deprivation          11.-(1)  If  the  Governor-General   is  satisfied  that  any  citizen  of  The 
of               Bahamas  has  at  any  time  after  9th  July   1973  acquired  by  registration, 
citizenship.     naturalisation  or  other  voluntary  and  formal  act  (other  than  marriage) 
                 the  citizenship of any  other country, the Governor-General may  by 
                 order  deprive  that  person  of  his  citizenship. 

                    (2)  If   the  Governor-General is  satisfied  that any  citizen   of  The 
                 Bahamas  has  at  any  time  after  9th  July   1973  voluntarily  claimed  and 
                 exercised  in  any  other  country  any  rights   available  to  him  under  the 
                 law  of  that  country,  being  rights  accorded  exclusively  to its  citizens, the 
                 Governor-General  may  by  order  deprive  that  person  of  his  citizenship. 

Renunciation         12.  Any  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  who  has  attained  the  age  of twenty- 
of               one  years  and  who- 
                    (a)  is also  a citizen  or national  of any  other  country  ; or 

                     (b)  intends  to  become  a  citizen  or  national   of  any  other  country, 
                 shall  be     entitled  to   renounce   his  citizenship of  The  Bahamas  by   a 
                 declaration  made  and  registered  in  such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed: 

                    Provided  that- 
                    (a)  in  the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  a  citizen  or national  of any 
                        other  country  at  the  date  of  registration of  his declaration or re- 
                        nunciation.  if  he  does  not  become  such  a  citizen  or  national  within 
                        six  months  from  the  date  of  registration  he  shall  be,- and  shall be 
                       deemed  to  have  remained,  a citizen  of  The  Bahamas  notwithstand- 
                       ing  the  making  and  registration  of  his  declaration  of  renunciation; 
                       and 
                    (b)  the   right    of   any   person to   renounce his citizenship  of  The 
                       Bahamas  during  any  period  when  The  Bahamas  is  engaged  in  any 
                       war  shall  be  subject  to  such  exceptions  or qualifications  as  may  be 
                       prescribed   in  the  interests  of  national  security  or  public  policy. 
    13.   Parliament  may  make  provision-                                                        
    (a) for  the  acquisition  of  citizenship  of  The  Bahamas  by  persons  who. 

       do not  become  citizens  of  The  Bahamas  by  virtue  of the  provisions 
       of this  Chapter  ; 
    (b)   for  depriving  of  his  citizenship  of  The  Bahamas  any  person  who 
       is  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  otherwise  than  by  virtue  of  paragraphs 
       (1)  or  (2)  of  Article  3   or  Articles  6  or  8  of  this  Constitution; or 
    (c)  for  the  certification     of  citizenship  of  The  Bahamas   for  persons 
       who  have   acquired  that  citizenship  and   who  desire  such   certifica- 
       tion. 

     14.-(1)  Any  reference  in  this  Chapter  to  the  father  of  a person  shall,   
 in  relation  to  any  person  born  out  of  wedlock  other  than  a  person  legiti-    
 mated  before   10th  July  1973,  be  construed  as  a  reference  to  the  mother 
 of  that  person. 

    (2)  For  the  purposes   of  this  Chapter,  a  person  born  aboard  a  regi- 
 stered   ship  or  aircraft,   or  aboard   an  unregistered   ship  or  aircraft   of 
 the  government  of  any  country,  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  born  in 
 the  place   in   which  the  ship  or  aircraft  was  registered   or,  as  the  case 
 may  be,  in  that  country. 

    (3)  Any  reference  in  this  Chapter  to  the  national  status  of  the  father 
 of  a  person   at  the  time  of  that  person's   birth,   shall,  in  relation  to  a 
 person  born  after  the  death  of  the  father,  be  construed  as  a  reference 
 to  the  national   status  of  the  father  at  the  time  of  the  father's  death; 
 and   where   that  death  occurred   before           10th   July   1973   and   the  birth 
 occurred  after  9th  July   1973  the  national   status  that  the  father  would 
 have  had  if  he  had  died  on   10th  July  1973   shall  be  deemed  to  be  his 
 national  status  at the  time  of  his  death. 

                                      CHAPTER  III 

         PROTECTION  OF  FUNDAMENTAL             RIGHTS  AND   FREEDOMS   OF  THE 

                                         INDIVIDUAL 
    15.  Whereas  every  person   in  The  Bahamas  is  entitled  to  the  funda-    
mental   rights  and  freedoms   of   the  individual,   that   is  to  say,   has   the   
                                                                                                  
right,   whatever      his   race,   place   of   origin,   political    opinions,   colour,    
creed  or  sex,  but  subject  to respect  for  the  rights  and  freedoms  of others    
and  for  the  public  interest,  to  each  and  all  of  the  following,  namely- 
   (a)  life,  liberty,  security  of  the  person  and  the  protection  of  the  law  ; 
    (b)   freedom  of  conscience,   of  expression  and  of  assembly  and  asso- 
      ciation  ;  and 
    (c)  protection   for  the  privacy   of  his  home   and   other  property   and 
      from  deprivation  of property  without  compensation, 

the   subsequent   provisions   of  this   Chapter           shall   have    effect   for   the 
ourpose   of  affording   protection   to  the  aforesaid   rights   and   freedoms 
subjeot  to  such  limitations  of  that  protection  as  are  contained  in  those 
provisions,  being  limitations   designed  to  ensure  that  the   enjoyment  of 
the  said  rights  and  freedoms  by  any  individual  does  not  prejudice  the 
rights   and  freedoms  of  others  or  the   public  interest.

Protection            16.-(1)  No  person  shall  be  deprived  intentionally  of his life save in 
of right  to      execution  of  the  sentence  of  a  court  in respect of a criminal offence  of 
life.             which  he  has  been  convicted. 

                     (2)   A  person   shall  not  be  regarded as having been deprived  of  his 
                  life  in  contravention  of  this  Artiole if  he dies as  the  result of the use. 
                  to  such  extent  and  in  such  circumstances  as are permitted  by   law.  of 
                  such  force  as  is  reasonably  justifiable-- 

                     (a) for  the  defence  of  any  person  from  violence  or  for  the  defence  of 
                        property  ; 
                     (b)   in  order  to  effect   a  lawful arrest or to prevent the  escape  of  a 
                        person  lawfully  detained  ; 
                     (c)  for the  purpose  of  suppressing a  riot, insurreotion  or mutiny ;  or 
                     (d)  in  order  to  prevent   the  commission  by  that  person  of  a  criminal 
                        offence, 

                  or  if  he  dies  as  a  result  of  a  lawful  act  of  war. 

Protection 
from                  17.-(1)  No  person  shall  be  subjected   to   torture  or  to  inhuman   or 
inhuman           degrading  treatment  or  punishment. 
treatment.           (2)  Nothing   contained in or done under the authority   of  any   law 

                  shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  in contravention of  this Article 
                  to  ,the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  authorises  the  infliotion  of any 
                  description  of punishment  that  was  lawful  in  the  Bahama  Islands  imme- 
                  diately  before   10th July  1973. 

Protection            18.-(1)  No  person  shall  be  held  in  slavery  or  servitude. 
from 
slavery  and 
forced               (2)  No  person  shall  be  required  to  perform  forced  labour. 
labour. 
                     (3)  For   the   purposes of this  Article, "forced labour" does not 
                  include- 
                     (a)  any  labour  required in consequence of the sentence or  order  of 
                        a  court  ; 

                     (b)   any  labour  required  of  a  member  of  a  disciplined  force  in  pur- 
                        suance  of. his  duties  as such  or, in  the  case  of  a  person  who  has 
                        conscientious  objections  to  service  in  a  naval, military or air force, 
                        any  labour   which   that  person   is  required   by   law  to   perform in 
                        place  of  such  service; 
                     (c)  labour required of  any person   while he is lawfully detained 
                        which,     though   not   required in consequence of  the  sentence  or 
                        order  of  a  court,  is  reasonably  necessary  in  the  interests of hygiene 
                        or  for  the  maintenance  of  the  place  in  which  he  is  detained  ; or 
                     (d)  any   labour  required  during  a   period  of  public  emergency  (that 
                         is  to  say,  a  period  to  which Article 29 of this Constitution applies) 
                        or  in  the  event  of  any  other  emergency  or  calamity  that  threatens 
                        the    life  or  well-being of the community, to the extent that the 
                        requiring   of  such  labour  is  reasonably   justifiable, in  the circum- 
                        stances  of  any  situation  arising  or  existing  during that period  or as 
                        a  result  of  that  other  emergency   or  calamity,  for the  purpose   of 
                        dealing  with  that  situation. 

      19.-(1) No   person  shall   be   deprived   of  his  personal   liberty   save    
  as  may  be  authorised  by  law  in  any  of  the  following  cases-                            
                                                                                                    
      (a) in  execution  of  the  sentence  or  order  of  a  court,  whether  estab-    
        lished   for  The  Bahamas   or   some  other   country,   in  respect   of   a   
        criminal  offence  of  which  he  has  been  convicted  or  in  consequence 
        of  his   unfitness  to  plead   to  a  criminal   charge or in  execution of 
        the  order  of  a  court  on ithe  grounds  of  his  contempt  of that  court 
        or  of  another  court  or tribunal  ; 
     (b)   in  execution  of  the  order  of  a  court  made  in  order  to  secure  the 
        fulfilment   of  any  obligation   imposed   upon  him  by   law; 
     (c)  for -the purpose  of  bringing  him  before  a  court  in  execution  of  the 
        order of  a  court  ; 
     (d)  upon  reasonable   suspicion  of  his  having  committed,   or  of  being 
        about to  conmit, a  criminal  offence  ; 
     (e) in  the  case  of  a  person  who  has  not  attained  -the age  of  eighteen 
        years,  for  the  purpose  of  his  education  or welfare  ; 
     (f)  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  spread  of  an  infectious  or  con- 
        tagious  disease  or  in  the  case  of  a  person  who  is,  or  is  reasonably 
        suspected  to  be,   of  unsound  mind,   addicted  to  drugs  or  alcohol, 
        or  a  vagrant,   for  the   purpose   of  his        care   or  treatment or  the 
       protection  of the  community  ; 
     (g)  for  the  purpose  of  preventing   the  unlawful  entry  of  that  person 
        into  The  Bahamas  or  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  the  expulsion, 
        extradition   or   other   lawful   removal   from   The  Bahamas   of  tha, 
       person  or  the  taking  of  proceedings  relating  thereto;  and,  without 
       prejudice   to  the  generality  of  the  foregoing,  a  law  may,   for  the 
       purposes  of this  sub-paragraph,  provide  that  a  person  who  is  not  a 
        citizen  of  The  Bahamas  may  be  deprived   of  his   liberty  to  such 
       extent  as   may  be  necessary          in  the   execution     of  a  lawful   order 
       requiring   that  person        to  remain   within   a   specified   area  within 
       The  Bahamas  or  prohibiting  him  from  being  within  such  an  area. 

    (2)  Any  person   who  is   arrested         or  detained   shall  be   informed  as 
 soon  as  is  reasonably  practicable,   in  a  language   that  he  understands, 
 of  the   reasons     for  his    arrest   or  detention      and   shall  be     permitted, 
 at  his  own  expense,  to  retain  and  instruct  without  delay  a  legal  repre- 
 sentativ     of  his  own  choice   and  to  hold  private  communication  with 
 him;   and  in   the  case  of  a  person  who   has   not  attained  the   age   of 

 eighteen  years  he   shall  also  be  afforded  a  reasonable   opportunity  for 
 communication  with  his  parent  or guardian. 

    (3)   Any   person   who   is   arrested   or  detained   in   such   a  case   as  is 
 mentioned  in   sub-paragraph   (1Xc)           or  (d)   of  this   Article   and  who  is 
not  released  shall  be  brought  without  undue  delay  before  a court:  and 
if   any  person  arrested  or  detained  in  such  a  case  as  is  mentioned  in 
the  said  sub-paragraph  (lXd)  is  not  tried  within  a  reasonable  time  he 
shall  (without prejudice  to  any  further  proceedings  that may  be  brought 
against   him)   be  released        either  uncondi-tionally       or   upon  reasonable 
conditions,  including   in   particular   such   conditions   as   are  reasonably 
necessary   to  ensure   that  he  appears   at  a  later  date   for  trial  or  for 
 proceedings  preliminary  to  trial. 

   (4)   Any  person  who  is  unlawfully   arrested  or  detained  by  any  other 
person     shall   be   entitled   to   compensation        therefor     from   that   other 
person. 

                     (5) Where  a  person  is  detained by  virtue of  such a law as is referred 
                  to   in  Article   29    of  this   Constitution, the following provisions shall 
                  apply- 
                     (a)  he  shall,  as   soon   as  reasonably  practicable  and  in any case not 
                        more  than  five  days  after  the  commencement  of  his  detention,  be 
                        furnished  with  a  statement  in  writing,  in  a  language  that  he  under- 
                        stands,  of  the  grounds  upon  which  he  is  detained  ; 
                     (b)  not   more     than    fourteen   days   after   the   commencement of  his 
                        detention,   a  notification   shall  be  published  in  the  Gazette stating 
                        that  he  has  been   detained  and  giving  particulars  of  the  provision 
                        of  law  under  which  his  detention  is  authorised  ; 
                     (c)  he  may  from  time  to  time  request  that  his  case  be  reviewed  under 
                        sub-paragraph   (d) of  this  paragraph  but,  where  he  has  made  such  a 
                        request,  no  subsequent  request  shall  be  made  before  the  expiration 
                        of  three  months  from  the  making  of   the  previous  request; 
                     (d)  where   a  request  is  made  under   sub-paragraph   (c)  of  this para- 
                        graph,   the   case   shall,  within   one   month  of the  making of the 
                        request,  be  reviewed by an independent and impartial tribunal 
                        established  by  law,  presided   over  by  the  Chief  Justice   or  another 
                        Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  appointed  by  him,  and  consisting  of 
                        persons  who  are  Justices  of the  Supreme  Court or who  are  qualified 
                        to be  appointed  as  Justices  of  the  Supreme  Court  ; 
                    (e)  he  shall  be  afforded  reasonable  facilities   to  consult  and  instruct, 
                        at  his  own  expense,  a  legal  representative   of  his  own  choice,   and 
                       he  and  any  such  legal  representative   shall  be  permitted  to  make 
                       written   or  oral  representations  or  both  to  the  tribunal   appointed 
                        for the  review  of his  case. 
                    (6)   On  any  review  by  a  tribunal  in  pursuance  of paragraph  (5) of  this 
                 Article  of   the  case   of  any   detained   person,   the   tribunal   may   make 
                 recommendations   concerning  the  necessity  or  expediency  of  continuing 
                 his  detention  to  the  authority  by  whom  it  was  ordered,  but,  unless  it  is 
                 otherwise  provided  by  law,  that  authority   shall  not  be  obliged  to  act 
                 in  accordance  with  any  such recommendations. 

                    (7)  When   any   person is detained  by virtue of such  a law as is 
                 referred   to  in  Article  29  of  this  Constitution  the  Prime  Minister  or  a 
                 Minister  authorised  by  him  shall,  not  more  than  thirty  days  after  the 
                 commence-ment  of  the  detention   and  thereafter  not  more  than  thirty 
                 days  after  the  making   of  the  previous   report,  make  a  report  to  each 
                 House  stating  the   number  of  persons   detained   as   aforesaid   and  the 
                 number  of  cases  in  which  the  authority  that  ordered  the  detention  has 
                 not   acted     in   accordance       with   the    recommendations of a tribunal 
                 appointed  in  pursuance  of paragraph  (5)  of  this Article: 
                     Provided  that  in  reckoning  any  period  of thirty  days  for  the  purposes 
                  of  this   paragraph   no account  shall  be taken of any period during 
                 which  Parliament  stands  prorogued   or  dissolved. 

Provisions           20.--(1)  If  any  person is charged with a criminal offence, then, unless 
to secure        the   charge   is    withdrawn, the case shall  be afforded a fair hearing 
protection 
of  law.         within     a   reasonable time by an independent and impartial court 
                  established  by  law. 
                    (2)  Every  person  who  is  charged  with  a  criminal  offence- 
                     (a)  shall   be  presumed to be innocent until he  is proved or  has 
                        pleaded  guilty; 

    (b)   shall  be  informed  as  soon  as  reasonably  practicable,  in a  language 
       that  he   understands   and  in   detail,   of  the   nature   of   the   offence 
       charged  ; 
    (c)  shall  be  given   adequate   time   and  facilities   for  the   preparation 
       of his  defence  ; 
    (d)  shall  be  permitted  to  defend  himself  before  the  court  in  person 
       or,  at  his  own  expense,  by  a  legal  representative  of  his  own  choice 
       or  by  a  legal  representative  at the  public  expense  where  so provided 
       by  or  under  a  law  in  force  in  The  Bahamas  ; 
    (e) shall  be  afforded   facilities  to  examine  in  person  or  by  his   legal 
       representative  the  witnesses   called   by  the  prosecution   before   the 
       court,  and  to  obtain  the  attendance  and  carry  out  the  examination 
       of  witnesses  to  testify  on  his  behalf  before  the  court  on  the  same 
       conditions  as  those  applying  to witnesses  called  by  the prosecution  ; 
    (I  shall  be  permitted  to  have  without  payment   the  assistance   of  an 
       interpreter  if  he  cannot  understand  the  language  used  at  the  trial 
       of the  charge  ; and 
    (g)  shall,  when  charged   on  information  in  the  Supreme  Court,  have 
       the  right  to  trial  by jury  ; 
 and  except  with   his  own  consent  the  trial  shall  not  take  place  in  his 
 absence   unless   he  so   conducts   himself   in  the   court  as  to  render'the 
 continuance   of  the  proceedings   in  his  presence   impracticable                 and  the 
 court  has   ordered  him   to  be   removed   and  the  trial  to  proceed   in   his 
 absence. 

    (3)  When   a   person   is   tried   for   any   criminal   offence,   the   accused 
 person   or  any  person   authorised   by   him  in  that  behalf  shall,   if  he  so 
 requires    and  subject   to  payment   of   such  reasonable              fee   as  may   be 
 prescribed     by  law.   be  given   within       a  reasonable   time  after  judgment 
 a  copy  for the  use  of  the  accused  person  of  any record  of the  proceedings 
 made  by  or on  behalf  of  the  court. 

    (4)  No  person      shall   be  held   to  be   guilty  of  a  criminal   offence   on 
 account  of  any  act  or  omission  that  did  not,  at  the  time  it  took  place, 
constitute   such   an  offence,        and  no  penalty   shall   be  imposed          for  any 
 criminal     offence    that    is  severer     in  degree     or   description      than   the 
maximum   penalty   that   might  have  been   imposed   for  that  offence   at 
 the  time  when  it was  committed. 

    (5)  No  person   who   shows   that  he   has   been   tried   by   a  competent 
court   for  a   criminal      offence   and   either  convicted         or  acquitted   shall 
again   be   tried   for  that  offence   or   for  any  other  criminal   offence             of 
which     he    could    have    been    convicted      at  the    trial   for   that   offence, 
save  upon  the   order  of  a         supeior  court   in  the  course   of  appeal   or 
review  proceedings  relating   to  the  conviction   or  acquittal. 

   (6)   No  person  shall  be  tried   for  a  criminal  offence   if  he  shows  that 
he  has  been  pardoned  for  that  offence. 

   (7)  No  person  who  is  tried  for  a  criminal  offence  shall  be  compelled 
to  give  evidence  at  the  trial. 

   (8)  Any court or  other adjudicating  authority prescribed  by law 
for  the  determination  of  the  existence   or  extent   of  any   civil   right  or 
obligation   shall  be   established   by  law  and   shall   be   independent   and 
imparftial;      and    where     proceedings        for    such    a   determination are 

                   instituted by any person before such a court or other adjudicating 
                   authority,   the  case   shall  be   given  a  fair hearing within a reasonable 
                   time. 
                      (9)  All   proceedings   instituted  in any court for the determination of 
                   the  existence   or  extent   of  any  civil  right  or  obligation, including the 
                   announcement  of  the  decision  of the  court,  shall  be  held  in public. 

                      (10)   Nothing in paragraph (9) of this Article shall  prevent the court 
                   from   excluding   from  the  proceedings persons   other   than  the   parties 
                  thereto   and  their  legal   representatives to  such extent as  the  court- 
                      (a)  may  be  empowered  by  law  so  to  do  and  may  consider  necessary 
                        or  expedient  in  circumstances  where  publicity  would  prejudice  the 
                        interests  of justice, or in interlocutory  proceedings or in the interests 
                        of   public    morality, the welfare of persons under the age  of 
                        eighteen   years   or  the protection of the private lives of persons 
                        concerned  in  the  proceedings; 
                     (b)   may  be  empowered  or required by law to do so in the interests 
                        of  defence,  public  safety  or public  order  ; or 
                     (c)  may  be   empowered   or  required  to  do  so  by   rules  of  court  and 
                        practice existing   immediately before 10th  July 1973 or by any 
                        law   made      subsequently to the extent that it makes provision 
                        substantially  to the same effect  as provision contained in any 
                        such  rules. 

                     (11)   Nothing   contained   in   or  done  under  the  authority of any law 
                  shall be held to be  inconsistent  with  or in contravention  of- 
                     (a)  sub-paragraph  (2)(a)  of this Article  to the extent that the   law 
                        in   question   imposes upon any   person   charged with a criminal 
                        offence  the  burden  of  proving  particular  facts  ; 
                     (b)   sub-paragraph (2)(e) of this Article to the  extent that  the   law 
                        in  question  imposes   conditions  that  must  be  satisfied if witnesses 
                        called  to   testify on behalf of an accused person are to be paid 
                        their  expenses  out  of public  funds  ; 
                     (c)  paragraph  (5) of  this Article to the extent that the law in question 
                        authorises   a  court  to  try  a  member of a disciplined force for a 
                        criminal  offence  notwithstanding any trial and conviction      or 
                        acquittal  of  that  member  under  the  disciplinary  law  of  that  force, 
                        so,  however,   that  any  court  so  trying   such   a  member  and  con- 
                        victing  him  shall   in  sentencing   him  to  any  punishment   take  into 
                        account  any punishment  awarded  him  under that disciplinary 
                       law. 

Protection          21.-(1)  Except  with  his  consent,  no  person  shall  be  subjected  to  the 
for privacy      search   of  his   person   or his  property or the entry  by  others on his 
of home  and     premises. 
other 
property.           (2)  Nothing  contained   in  or  done   under  the  authority   of  any   law 
                 shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or in  contravention of this  Article 
                  o the extent that the  law in  question makes  provision- 
                    (a)  which  is  reasonably  required- 
                          (i)  in  the interests of defence,  public safety, public order, public 
                             morality, public health, town  and country planning, the 
                             development  of   mineral resources, or the development or 
                             utilisation  of any other  property in such  a  manner as  to 
                             promote  the public  benefit;  or 

          (ii)   for   the   purpose   of  protecting     the   rights    and   freedoms 
             other  persons  ; 
    (b)   to  enable  an  officer  or  agent  of  the  Government  of The  Bahamas, 
       a  local  government  authority  or  a  body   corporate  established   by 
       law   for  public  purposes   to  enter  on  -the premises   of  any   person 
       in   order  to   inspect   those   premises   or  anything   thereon   for   the 
       purpose     of  any  tax,   rate  or  due   or  in  order  to  carry   out  work 
       connected  with   any  property   that  is   lawfully   on  those  premises 
       and  that  belongs  to  that  Government,   authority  or  body  corporate, 
       as  the  case  may  be  ; or 
    (c)  to  authorise,  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  judgment  or  order 
       of  a  court  in   any  civil  proceedings,   the  search  of  any  person   or 
       property   by   order  of  a  court  or  the   entry  upon  any  premises  by 
       such  order, 
 and  except  so  far  as  that  provision  or,  as  the  case  may  be.  the  thing 
 done  under  the  authority  thereof  is  shown  not  to  be  reasonably  justifi- 
 able  in  a  democratic  society. 

    22.-(1)  Except  with  his  consent,  no  person  shall  be  hindered  in  the   
 enjoyment  of  his   freedom  of  conscience,   and  for  the  purposes   of  this  
                                                                                                   
Article  the  said  freedom  includes   freedom  of  thought  and  of  religion,    
 freedom  to  change  his  religion  or  belief  and  freedom,  either  alone  or 
 in  community  with  others,  and both  in  public  and  in private,  to  manifest 
 and  propagate  his  religion  or  belief  in  worship,  teaching,  practice  and 
 observance. 

    (2)  Except  with  his  consent  (or, if he  is  a  person  who  has  not  attained 
 the   age   of   eighteen   years,  the   consent   of   his   guardian)   no   person 
 attending  any  place  of  education  shall  be  required  to  receive  religious 
 instruction   or  to  take   part   in   or  attend   any  religious ceremony  or 
 observance   if  that   instruction,   ceremony or observance relates to a 
religion  other than his  own. 

   (3)  No  religious  body  or  denomination  shall  be  prevented   from  or 
hindered  in  providing  religious  instruction  for  persons  of  that  body  or 
denomination   in  the  course   of  any  education   provided  by  that  body 
or   denomination whether or  not  that  body   or  denomination is in 
receipt   of  any  government   subsidy,   grant  or  other  form  of  financial 
assistance   designed   to  meet,   in  whole   or  in   part,  the   cost  of   such 
course  of education. 

   (4)  No  person  shall  be  compelled  to  take  any  oath  which  is  contrary 
to  his  religion  or  belief   or  to  take   any   oath  in  a  manner   which  is 
contrary  to  his  religion  or belief. 

   (5) Nothing   contained  in  or  done under the authority  of  any  law 
shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention  of this  Article 
to   the   extent     that   the   law   in   question   makes provision which is 
reasonably  required- 
   (a) in   the  interests  of  defence.   public   safety,   public   order,   public 
      morality  or public  health;  or 
   (b)  for  the  purpose  of  protecting   the  rights  and  freedoms  of  other 
       persons,  including  the  right  to  observe   and  practise  any  religion 
       without   the     unsolicited     interference      of   members       of   any   other 
      religion, and  except  so  far  as  that  provision  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  thing 
                  done  under the  authority thereof  is  shown not  to  be reasonably justifiable 
                  in  a  democratic  society. 

 Protection           23.-(1)  Except  with  his  consent,  no  person  shall  be  hindered  in  the 
 of  freedom 
 of               enjoyment   of  his  freedom   of  expression,  and  for  the  purposes   of  this 
 expression.      Article  the  said  freedom  includes  freedom  to  hold  opinions,  to  receive 
                   and  impart   ideas   and   information   without   interference,  and  freedom 
                   from  interference  with  his  correspondence. 

                     (2)  Nothing   contained   in  or  done   under  the   authority   of  any  law 
                   shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article 
                  to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes   provision- 
                     (a)  which  is  reasonably required- 
                           (i) in the interests of defence, public safety, public  order,  public 
                              morality  or  public  health  ; or 
                           (ii)  for  the  purpose of protecting the rights, reputations and free- 
                              doms  of other persons,  preventing  the  disclo6ure  of  information 
                              received  in  confidence,  maintaining  the  authority  and  indepen- 
                              dence  of  the  courts,  or  regulating  telephony, telegraphy, posts, 
                              wireless  broadcasting,   television,  public  exhibitions  or  public 
                              entertainment  ; or 
                     (b)  which  imposes  restrictions  upon  persons  holding  office  under  the 
                        Crown  or upon  members  of a  disciplined  force, 
                  and  except  so  far  as  that  provision  or, as  the  case  may  be,   the  thing 
                  done  under  the  authority  thereof  is  shown  not  to  be  reasonably  justi- 
                  fiable  in  a  democratic  society. 

Protection           24.-(1)  Except  with  his  consent,  no  person  shall  be  hindered   in  the 
of freedom             yment  of  h 
of assembly       enjo                is  freedom  of peaceful assembly and association, that is 
and               to  say, his right to assemble freely  and  associate  with  other  persons and 
association,     in  particular to form or belong  to political parties, or to form  or  belong 
                  to trade  unions or other  associations  for  the  proteoction  of  his interests. 

                     (2)  Nothing   contained   in   or  done  under  the   authority   of  any  law 
                 shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention of this  Article 
                 to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes  provision- 
                     (a)  which  is  reasonably  required- 
                           (i)  in  the  interests  of  defence, public safety, public order, public 
                              morality  or  public  health;  or 
                           (ii)  for.  the   purpose   of  protecting the rights and freedoms of 
                              other  persons  ; or 
                     (b)  which  imposes  restrictions  upon  persons  holding  office  under the 
                        Crown  or upon  members  of a disciplined  force, 
                 and  except  so  far  as  that  provision  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  thing 
                 done.  under       the   authority      thereof    is  shown not to be reasonably 
                 justifiable  in  a  democratic  society. 

Protection           25.--(1)   Except  with  his  consent,  no  person   shall  be  hindered  in  the 
of freedom 
of               enjoyment  of  his  freedom   of  movement,  and  for  the  purposes   of  this 
movement.        Article  the  said  freedom  means  the  right to  move  freely  throughout  The 
                 Bahamas,  the  right  to reside  in  any  part  thereof,  the  right  to  enter  The 
                 Bahamas,  the  right  to  leave The  Bahamas  and immunity  from  expulsion 
                 therefrom. 

     (2)   Nothing    contained   in     or  done   under  the   authority  of  any  law 
  shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention  of  this  Articie 
 to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes  provision- 
    (a)  which  is  reasonably  required- 
           (i)  in  the  interests  of  defence,  public  safety,  public  order,  public 
              morality,   public   health,   town   and   country   planning   or  the 
              prevention  of  plant  or  animal  diseases  ; or 
           (ii)  for  the  purpose  of protecting  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  other 
              persons, 
        and  except  so  far  as  that  provision  or,  as the  case  may  be,  the  thing 
        done  under   the   authority  thereof   is   shown  not  to  be   reasonably 
        justifiable   in  a  democratic  society  ; 
     (b)  for  the  removal  of  a  person  from  The  Bahamas  to  be  tried  outside 
        The  Bahamas  for  a  criminal   offence   or  to  undergo   imprisonment 
        in   some  other  country   in  respect   of   a  criminal   offence   of  which 
       he  has  been  convicted  ; 
     (c)  for  the  imposition  of  restrictions  upon  the  movement  or residence 
        within  The  Bahamas  of  public  officers  or  members  of  a  disciplined 
        force   that  are  reasonably   required   for  the  purpose   of  the  proper 
       performance   of  -their functions  ; or 
     (d)  for  the   imposition  of  restrictions  on  the  movement   or  residence 
        within   The  Bahamas  of  any  person   who  is  not   a  citizen  of  The-- 
        Bahamas   or   the   exclusion   or   expulsion  therefrom  of any   such 
       person  ; or 
     (e) for  the   imposition  of  restrictions   on   the  right  of any person to 
        leave  The  Bahamas   in  the  public   interest,  or  for  securing  com- 
        pliance     with    any international  obligation  of the  Government 
        of   The   Bahamas particulars of which have been laid  before 
        Parliament. 

    (3)  Any   restriction on a  person's freedom of  movement which is 
 involved   in  his   lawful   detention  shall  not  be   held  to   be  inconsistent 
 with  or  in contravention  of  this  Article. 

    (4)   For  the  purposes   of  sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph (2)  of  this 
 Article  "law"       in  that  paragraph  includes  directions  in  writing  regarding 
 the   conduct  of  public  officers   generally   or  any   class  of  public  officer 
 issued  by  the  Government  of The  Bahamas. 

    26.-()      Subject   to  the  provisions   of  paragraphs (4),  (5) and  (9)   of   
 this  Article,  no  law  shall  make  any  provision  which   is   discriminatory  
                                                                                                     
either  of  itself  or  in  its  effect.                                                           
    (2)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  paragraphs  (6), (9) and (10) of  this  
 Article,  no  person  shall  be  treated  in  a  discriminatory  manner  by   any  
 person   acting   by  virtue  of  any  written   law  or  in  the  performance of 
the functions of any public  office  or any  public authority. 
    (3)  In  this  Article,  the  expression  "discriminatory"  means  affording 
different   treatment   to   different   persons   attributable  wholly or  mainly 
 to their  respective  descriptions  by  race,  place  of origin,  political  opinions. 
colour  or  creed  whereby  persons  of  one  such  description  are  subjected 
to  disabilities  or restrictions  to  which  persons  of  another  such  description 
are  not  made  subject  or  are  accorded  privileges   or  advantages  which 
are  not  accorded  to  persons  of  another  such  description. 

     (4)   Paragraph  (1)  of  this  Article  shall  not  apply  to  any  law  so  far  as 
 that  law makes  provision- 
     (a)  for  the  appropriation  of revenues  or  other  funds  of  The  Bahamas 
        or  for  the  imposition  of  taxation  (including  the  levying  of  fees  for 
        the  grant of  licences)  ;  or 
     (b)  with  respect  to  the  entry  into  or  exclusion  from,  or  the employ- 
        ment,     engaging     in    any    business or profession, movement or 
        residence   within,   The  Bahamas   of   persons   who   are  not   citizens 
        of  The  Bahamas  ;  or 
     (c)  with  respect  -to adoption,  marriage,  divorce,  burial,  devolution  of 
       property  on death or other matters  of personal  law  ; or 
    (d) whereby  persons  of  any  such  description  as  is  mentioned  in  para- 
       graph   (3)    of  this   Article  may   be  subjected   to  any  disabiity   or 
       restriction  or  may  be   accorded  any  privilege  or  advantage  which, 
       having  regard  to  its  nature  and  to  special  circumstances  pertaining 
       to  tose  persons   or  to  persons  of  any   other  such   description,   is 
       reasonably  justifiable  in a democratic  society  ; or 
    (e)  for  authorising  Vh       granting  of  licences   or  certificates  permitting 
       the  conduct  of  a  lottery,  the  keeping   of  a  gaming  house   or  the 
       carrying  on  of  gambling  in  any  of  its  forms  subject  to  conditions 
       which   impose   upon   persons   who           are   citizens   of  The  Bahamas 
       disabilities   or  restrictions   to  which        other  persons      are   not   made 
       subject. 

    (5)  Nothing  contained   in  any   law  shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent 
 with  or  in  contravention  of  paragraph   (1)  of  this  Article  to  the  extent 
 that  it  makes  provision  with  respect  to  standards  or  qualifications  (not 
 being  a  standard  or  qualification  specifically  relating  to  race,  place  of 
origin,  political  opinions,   colour  or  creed)  in  order   to  be  eligible   for 
service  as  a  public  officer  or  as  a  member  of  a disciplined  force  or  for 
the  service  of  a  local  government  authority  or  a  body  corporate  estab- 
lished  by  law  for public  purposes. 

   (6)   Paragraph  (2)   of  this  Article  shall  not  apply  to  anything  which 
is   expressly     or  by   necessary      implication   authorised  to  be   done  by 
any   such  provision   of  law  as   is  referred   to  in  paragraphs   (4)   or  (5) 
of  this  Article. 

    (7)  Subject   to  the  provisions  of   sub-paragraph  (4)(e) and of  para- 
graph  (9)  of  this  Article,  no  person  shall  be  treated  in  a discriminatory 
manner  in  respect   of  access   to   any   of  -the following   places   to  which 
the   general     public   have      access,   namely,      shops,   hotels,     restaurants. 
eating-houses,       licensed  premises,  places   of  entertainment  or  places   of 
resort. 

   (8)   Subject  to  the  provisions  of this  Article  no  person  shall  be  treated 
in  a  discriminatory  manner- 
   (a) in  respect  of  any  conveyance  or  lease  or  agreement  for,  or in  con- 
      sideration  of,  or collateral  to, a  conveyance  or  lease  of  any  freehold 
      or  leasehold  hereditaments  which  have   been  offered   for  sale   or 
      lease  to the  general  public  ; 
   (b)  in.  !respect  of  any  covenant  or  provisions   in  any  conveyance   or 
      lease  or  agreement  for,  or  in  consideration  of,  or  collateral  to,  a 
      conveyance   or   lease  restricting   by  discriminatory   provisions   the 
      transfer,  ownership,  use  or  occupation  of any  freehold  or  leasehold 
      hereditaments       which   have   been   offered        for  sale   or  lease   to   the 
      general  public. 

   (9)   Nothing   contained   in   or  done  under  the   authority   of  any   law 
shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention  of  this  Article 
to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes  provision  whereby  persons 
of  any  such  description  as  is  mentioned  in  paragraph  (3) of  this  Article 
may     be   subjected      to   any    restriction    on    the   rights    and     freedoms 
guaranteed  by  Articles  21,   22,  23,  24  and  25  of  this  Constitution,  being 
such    a   restriction   as   is   authorised   by   Article    21(2)(a),    22(5),   23(2), 
24(2)  or  25(2)(a)  or  (e),  as  the  case  may  be. 

   (10)   Nothing   in   paragraph   (2)       of   this  Article   shall   affect   any   dis- 
cretion   relating   to  the  institution,   conduct  or  discontinuance   of   civil 
or  criminal  proceedings   in  any  court  that  is  vested  in  any  person  by  or 
under  this  Constitution  or  any  other law. 

   27.-(1)  No  property  of  any  description  shall  be  compulsorily  taken   Protection 
possession  of,  and  no  interest  in  or  right  over  property  of  any  descrip-  from 
tion  shall  be  compulsorily  acquired,  except  where  the  following  condi-  deprivaty. 
tions  are  satisfied,  that  is  to  say- 
    (a) the  taking  of possession  or  acquisition  is  necessary  in  the  interests 
       of   defence,    public   safety,   public   order,   public   morality,   public 
      health,  town  and  country planning  or the development  or utilisation 
       of  any  property  in  such  manner  as  to  promote  the  public  benefit 
       or  the  economic  well-being  of  the  community  ;  and 
    (b)  the  necessity  therefor  is  such  as  to  afford  reasonable  justification 
       for  the  causing   of   any   hardship   that   may   result  to   any  person 
      having  an  interest  in  or  right  over  the  property  ;  and 
   (c)  provision  is  made  by  a law  applicable  to  that  taking  of possession 
       or  acquisition- 
         (i) for  the  making  of  prompt  and  adequate  compensation  in  the 
             circumstances;  and 
          (ii)  securing  to  any  person   having  an  interest  in   or  right  over 
            the  property  a  right  of  access  to  the  Supreme  Court,  whether 
            direct  or on appeal  from  any other authority,  for the  determina- 
            tion   of  his   -interest  or   right,   the     legality   of  the   taking   of 
            possession      or  acquisition      of  the  property,       interest   or   right, 
            and  the  amount  of  any  compensation  to  which  he  is  entitled, 
            and   for  the  purpose   of   obtaining   prompt  payment   of   that 
            compensation  ;  and 
   (c)  any  party  to  proceedings   in  the  Supreme  Court  relating  to  such 
      a  claim  is  given  by  law  the  same  rights  of  appeal  as  are  accorded 
      generally  to  parties  to  civil  proceedings   in  that  Court  sitting  as  a 
      court  of  original jurisdiction. 

   (2) Nothing  in  this  Article  shall  be  construed  as  affecting  the  making 
or   operation      of   any   law   so  far     as   it  provides     for   the   taking of 
possession  or  acquisition  of property- 
   (a)  in  satisfaction  of any  tax,  rate  or  due; 
   (b)   by   way   of  penalty     for  breach   of   the  law,  whether   under  civil 
      process   or  after   conviction   of   a  criminal   offence   under   the   law 
      of  The  Bahamas; 
     (c)  as  an  incident  of  a  lease,  tenancy,  mortgage,  charge,  bill  of  sale, 
         pledge  or  contract; 
     (d)  upon  the  attempted  removal   of  the  property   in  question   out  of 
         or  into   The  Bahamas   in  contravention   of  any  law  ; 
     (e)  by  way  of  the  taking  of  a  sample  for  the  purposes  of  any  law; 
     (I) where   the  property   consists  of  an  animal   upon   its  being  found 
         trespassing  or straying  ; 
     (g) in  the  execution  of judgments  or orders  of courts; 
     (h)  by  reason   of   its  being  in   a  dilapidated   or  dangerous state  or 
        injurious  to  the  health  of  human  beings,  animals  or  plants  ; 
     (t)  in  consequence   of  any  law  making   provision   for  the  validation 
        of  titles  to   land  or  (without  prejudice   to   the  generality   of  the 
        foregoing      words)      the   confirmation  of   such   titles,  or for  the 
        extinguishment  of  adverse  claims,  or  with  respect   to  prescription 
        or  the  limitation  of  actions  ; 
     (I)  for  so  long  only  as  may  be   necessary   for  the  purposes  of  any 
        examination,  investigaition,  trial  or  inquiry  or,  in  the  case  of  land, 
        the  carrying  out  thereon- 
           (i)   of  work   or  reclamation,   drainage,   soil  conservation   or  the 
              conservation  of  other  natural  resources  ;  or 
           (ii)  of  agricultural  development  or  improvement  that  the  owner 
              or  occupier  of  the   land  has   been  required,  and  has,  without 
              reasonable  and  lawful  excuse,  refused  or failed  to carry out  ; or 
    (k)  to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes  provision   for  the 
       vesting  or taking  of possession  or  acquisition  or administration  of- 
           (i)  enemy  property; 
           (ii)  property  of  a  deceased  person,  a person  of unsound  mind  or 
              a  person  who  has  not  attained   the  age  of  twenty-one   years. 
              for  the  purpose   of  its  administration   for  the  benefit   of  the 
              persons  entitled  to  the  beneficial   interest  therein  ; 
           (iii)   property  of  a  person  adjudged   insolvent  or  a  defunct  com- 
              pany  that  has  been  struck  off  the  Register  of  Companies.  or  a 
              body  corporate  in  liquidation,  for  the  purpose  of  its  adminis- 
              tration  for the  benefit  of  the  creditors  of  that  insolvent  person 
              or   body   corporate       and,   subject     thereto,   for  the   benefit of 
              other persons  entitled  to  the beneficial  interest  in the  property; 
              or 
          (iv)  property  subject  to  a  trust,  for  the  purpose  of  vesting  the 
             property  in  persons  appointed  as trustees  under  the  instrument 
             creating  the  trust  or  by   a  court  or.  by  order  of  a  court,  for 
             the  purpose  of giving  effect  to the  trust. 

   (3)   Nothing   contained  in   or  done  under  the  authority   of  any   law 
shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention  of  this  Article 
to  the  extent  that  the  law  in  question  makes  provision   for  the  orderly 
marketing   or  production   or  growth   or  extraction   of  any   agricultural 
or  fish  product  or  mineral  or  water  or  any  article  or  thing  prepared 
for  market  or  manufactured  therefor  or for  the  reasonable  restriction  of 
the  use  of  any  property  in  the  interest  of  safeguarding  the  interests  of 
others  or  the  protection  of  tenants,  licensees  or  others  having  rights  in 
or  over  such  property. 

       (4)  Nothing   contained   in  or  done   under  the  authority   of  any   law 
    shall  be  held  to be  inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention  of  this  Article 
    to  the  extent  that  the   law  in  question  makes  provision  for  the   com- 
    pulsory   taking   possession       in   the  public   interest   of   any  property,   or 
    the  compulsory  acquisition  in  the  public  interest  of  any  interest  in  or 
    right  over  property,  where  that  property,  interest  or  right  is  held  by  a 
    body  corporate  established  directly  by  law  for public  purposes  in  which 
    no monies  have  been  invested  other  -than  
                                                          monies  provided  by  Parliament 
    or by  any  Legislature  established  for  the  former  Colony  of  the  Bahama 
    Islands. 

       28.-(1)  If  any person  alleges  that  any  of  the  provisions  of  Articles   16   
    to  27   (inclusive)   of  this   Constitution  has  been,   is        being   or  is  likely     
                                                                                                     
    to  be  contravened   in  relation  to  him  then,  without   prejudice   to  any                 
    other  action with  respect  to  the  same matter  which  is  lawfully  available, 
    that  person  may  apply  to  the  Supreme  Court  for redress. 

       (2)   The  Supreme  Court  shall  have  original jurisdiction- 
       (a) to  hear  and  determine   any  application  made   by  any  person   in 
          pursuance  of  paragraph  (1) of this  Article  ; and 
       (b)  to  determine  any  question  arising in  the  case  of  any  person  which 
          is  referred  to  it  in  pursuance  of  paragraph  (3)        of this  Article, 
    and  may  make  such  orders,  issue   such  writs  and  give  such  directions 
   .as  it may  consider  appropriate  for the  purpose  of  enforcing  or securing 
    the  enforcement   of  any  of  the  provisions  of  the  said  Articles   16  to  27 
    (inclusive)  to  the  protection  of which the  person  concerned  is entitled: 
       Provided  that  the  Supreme  Court  shall  not  exercise  its  powers  under 
    this  paragraph  if  it  is  satisfied  that  adequate  means   of  redress   are  or 
    have  been  available  to  the  person  concerned  under  any  other  law. 

       (3)  If,  in  any  proceedings   in  any  court  established  for  The  Bahamas 
    other  than  the  Supreme   Court  or  the   Court  of  Appeal,   any  question 
    arises   as   to  the  contravention       of  any  of  the  provisions   of  the   said 
    Articles   16  to  27  (inclusive),  the  court  in  which  the  question  has  arisen 
    shall  refer the  question  to  the Supreme  Court. 

       (4)   No  law  shall  make   provision   with   respect   to  rights   of  appeal 
    from    any   determination       of  the  Supreme   Court  in  pursuance   of   this 
    Article  that  is  less  favourable  to  any  party  thereto  than  the  rights  of 
   appeal  from   determinations  of  the  Supreme   Court  that  are  accorded 
   generally  to  parties  to  civil  proceedings  in  that  Court  sitting  as  a  court 
   of  original  jurisdiction. 

      (5)  Parliament   may  make   laws   to  confer  upon  the  Supreme   Court 
   such  additional  or  supplementary  powers  as  may  appear to be necessary 
   or  desirable   for  enabling   the   Court  more   effectively   to  exercise   the 
   jurisdiction     conferred   upon   it  by   paragraph  (2)  of  this  Article  and 
   may  make  provision  with  respect  -to the  practice  and  procedure  of  the 
   Court while  exercising  that jurisdiction. 

      29.--(1)    This  Article  applies  to  any period  when-                                     
      (a)  The Bahamas  is  at  war;  or                        
      (b)   there  is  in  force  a  proclamation   (in  this  section  referred  to  as  a   
          "proclamation       of   emergency  ")  made   by   the         Governor-General 
         and   published      in   4he   Gazette     declaring   that   a  state   of  public 
         emergency  exists   for  the  purposes   of  this  section. 
                      (2)   Nothing   contained   in   or  done  under  the authority of any  aw 
                   shall  be  held  to  be  inconsistent with or in contravention of Article 19, 
                   any  provision   of  Article  20   other  than  paragraph  (4)   thereof,  or  any 
                   provision   of   Articles   21 to 26 (inclusive) of this Constitution to the 
                   extent  that   the  law   in   question  makes in  relation  to  any period   to 
                   which  this  Article  applies  provision,  or  authorises  the  doing  during  any 
                   such  period  of  anything,  which  is  reasonably  justifiable  in  the  circum- 
                   stances  of  any  situation  or  existing  during  that  period  for  the  purpose 
                   of  dealing  with  that  situation. 

                      (3)  Where     any   proclamation of emergency   has  been   made,   copies 
                   thereof   shall   as  soon   as  practicable be laid   before   both  Houses of 
                   Parliament,   and  if  for   any   cause   those  Houses are not  due  to  meet 
                   within  five  days  the  Governor-General  shall,  by  proclamation  published 
                   in  the  Gazette,  summon  them  to  meet  within  five  days  and  they  shall 
                   accordingly  meet  and  sit  upon  the  day  appointed  by  the  proclamation 
                  and  shall  continue   to  sit   and  act  as  if  they   had stood adjourned or 
                  prorogued  to that  day: 
                     Provided  that  if  the  proclamation   of  emergency   is  made  during  the 
                  period  between  a dissolution  of  Parliament  and  the  next  ensuing  general 
                  election- 
                      (a)  the   Houses   to   be  summoned   as  aforesaid   shall  be   the Houses 
                        referred  kto  in  Article  66  of  this  Constitution  unless  the  Governor- 
                         General  is  satisfied  that  it  will  be practicable to hold that election 
                        within  seven  days  of the  making  of the  proclamation  of  emergency; 
                         and 
                     (b)   if the  Governor-General is  so satisfied,  he  shall (instead of sum- 
                        moring   the  Houses   so  referred   to  meet  within   five   days  of  the 
                        making  of the proclamation) summon   the  Houses  of the  new 
                        Parliament  to  meet  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  holding  of  that 
                        election. 

                     (4)   A  proclamation   of  emergency   shall,  unless   it  is  sooner  revoked 
                  by  the  Governor-General,   cease  to  be  in  force  at  the  expiration  of  a 
                  period  of  fourteen  days  beginning   on  the  date  on  which  it  was  made 
                  or  such  longer  period  as  may  be  provided  under  paragraph  (5) of  this 
                  Article,  but  without  prejudice   to  the  making  of  another  proclamation 
                  of  emergency  at or  before  the  end  of  that  period. 

                     (5)  If  at  any   time  while   a  proclamation   of  emergency is inforce 
                  (including  any  time  while  it is in  force  by virtue of  the provisions  of 
                  this  paragraph)  a  resolution   is  passed   by   each  House   of  Parliament 
                  approving  its  continuance  in  force   for  a  further  period,  not  exceeding 
                  six  months,  beginning  on  the  date  on  which  it  would   otherwise  expire, 
                  the  proclamation  shall,  if  not  sooner revoked,  continue  in  force  for  that 
                  further  period. 

Saving  of          30.-(1)  Subject  to  paragraph (3)  of  this  Article,  nothing   contained 
existing  law.    in or  done  under  the  authority  of  any  written  law  shall  be  held  to  be 
                 inconsistent  with   or  in   contravention of  any  provision  of  Articles 16 
                 to  27   (inclusive) of this Constitution to the extent that  the   law  in 
                 question- 
                     (a) is  a  law  (in  this  Article  referred to as "an existing law") that 
                        was   enacted   or  made  before 10th  July     1973   and  has  continued 
                        to  be  part  of the  law of The  Bahamas  at all  times  since that  day; 

     (b)  repeals  and  re-enacts  an  existing  law without  alteration  ; or 
     (c)  alters   an   existing   law     and   does   not  thereby   render   that   law 
        inconsistent   with      any   provision      of   the   said   Articles     16   to   27 
       (inclusive)  in  a  manner  in  which,  or  to  an  extent  to  which,   it  was 
       not  previously  so inconsistent. 

    (2)   In  sub-paragraph  (lXc)  of  this  Article  the reference  to  altering  an 
 existing  law  includes  references   to  repealing  it  and  re-enacting  it  with 
 modifications       or  making   different    provisions in   lieu  thereof, and   to 
 modifying       it;  and   in    paragraph   (1)   of   this  Article   "written law" 
 includes  any  instrument  having  the  force  of  law  and  in  this  paragraph 
 and  the  said  paragraph   (1)  references   to  the  repeal   and  re-enactment 
 of  an  existing  law  shall  be  construed  accordingly. 

    (3)  This  Article  does  not  apply  to  any  regulation  or  other  instrument 
 having  legislative  effect   made,   or  to  any  executive  act  done,  after  9th 
 July    1973    under   the   authority   of  any   such  law   as   is   mentioned in 
 paragraph  (1) of  this  Article. 

    31.-(1)   In  this  Chapter-                                                                    
        "contravention  ",  in  relation  to  -any requirement,  includes  a  failure  
    to  comply  with  that  requirement;   and  cognate  expressions  shall  be 
    construed   accordingly  ; 
        "court"      means      any   court    of    law   having  jurisdiction  in   The 
    Bahamas   other  than   a  court  established  by  a  disciplinary  law,  and 
    includes  the  Judicial  Committee   of  Her  Majesty's  Privy  Council   or 
    any  court   substituted  therefore  by   any  law  made  under  Article 105 
    of this  Constitution  and- 
    (a) In   Article     16,   Article    18,  Article     19,  paragraphs       (2),  (3),  (5), 
       (8),   (9)  and  (10)    of  Article   20,  Article   26  and  paragraph   (3)  of 
       Article  28    of  this   Constitution  includes,   in  relation  to  an  offence 
       against  a  disciplinary  law,  a  court  established  by  such  a  law  ;  and 
    (b)  In  Article   18,   Article   19  and  paragraph  (3)        of  Article  28  of  this 
       Constitution   includes,        in   relation   to   an   offence      against    a   dis- 
       ciplinary     law,   any   per~on      or  authority   empowered           to   exercise 
      jurisdiction   in  respect   of  that  offence; 
       "disciplinary      law"     means   a  law  regulating  the  discipline   of  any 
    disciplined  force  ; 
       "disciplined      force"    means- 
    (a) a  naval,  military  or  air  force; 
   (b)   the  Police  Force  of  The  Bahamas; 
   (c)  the  Prison  Service  of  The Bahamas  ; or 
   (d)  any   other  force  or  service  specified  by  Act  of  Parliament  to  be 
      a  disciplined  force  for  the  purposes  of  this  Chapter; 
      " legal  representative  "  means   a  person  entitled  to  practise  in  The 
   Bahamas  as Counsel  and  Attorney  of the  Supreme  Court  ; 
      "member"         in  relation  to  a -disciplined  force  includes   any  person 
   who,  tinder  the  law  regulating  the  discipline  of  that  force,  is  subject 
   to  that  discipline. 

   (2)  Any  reference  in  Articles   16,        19,   25   and  27  of  this  Constitution 
to  a  criminal  offence  shall  be  construed  as  including  an  offence  against 
disciplinary     law,    and   any     such   reference      in   paragraphs       (2)   to  (7) 


                  (inclusive)  of  Article  20   of  this  Constitution  shall,  in relation to pro- 
                  ceedings     before     a   court    constituted by or under disciplinarylaw, 
                  be  construed  in  the  same  manner. 

                     (3)  In  relation  to  any  person  who  is  a  memberof  a disciplined  force 
                  raised   under   a   law   of   any      country   other than The   Bahamas   and 
                  lawfully  present  in  The  Bahamas,  nothing  contained  in  or  done  under 
                  the  authority  of  the  disciplinary  law  of  that  force  shall  be  held  to be 
                  inconsistent,  with  or  in ontravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 

                                                        CHAPTER  IV 

                                                 THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL 

 Establish-          32.   There  shall  be   a  Governor-General   of  The  Bahamas  who  shall 
 ment of          be  appointed  by  Her  Majesty  and  shall  hold  office  during  Her  Majesty's 
office  of 
Governor-        pleasure  and  who  shall  be  Her  Majesty's representative  in The  Bahamas. 
 General. 
Acting               33.-(1)   Whenever   the  office   of  Governor-General   is   vacant  or  the 
Governor-        holder  of  the  office  is  absent  from  The  Bahamas   or  is  for  any  other 
General.         reason   unable  to  perform   the  functions  of  his   office,   those   functions 
                  shall be  performed- 
                     (a)  by  any  person  for  the  time  being   designated  by  Her  Majesty  in 
                        that  behalf  who   is   in  The  Bahamas   and   able  to   perform   those 
                        functions;  or 
                     (b)  at  any  time  when  there  is  no  person  in  The  Bahamas  so  desig- 
                       nated  and  able  to  perform  those  functions,  by  the  holder  of  the 
                        office  of  Chief  Justice  ; or 
                     (c)  at  any  time  referred   to  in  sub-paragraph (b)  of  this  paragraph 
                       when  the  office  of  Chief  Justice  is  vacant  or  the  holder  thereof is 
                       absent  from  The  Bahamas   or  is   for  any  other  reason   unable   to 
                       perform  those  functions,  -by  
                                                             the  President  of  the  Senate. 
                     (2)   The  holder   of   the   office   of   Governor-General or any person 
                  designated   under sub-paragraph  (l)(a)   of  this Article  or by sub- 
                 paragraph   (1)(b)       of  -this Article  shall  not, for  the  purposes of  this 
                 Article,  be   regarded   as   absent   from   The   Bahamas   or  as   unable   to 
                 perform   the   functions  of  the   office  of  Governor-General   at  any  time 
                 when  there  is  a  subsisting  appointment  of  a  deputy  under  Article  34 
                  of this  Constitution. 

Deputy  to           34.1)  Whenever  the  Governor-General- 
Governor-            (a) has  occasion  to  be  absent  from  The  Bahamas  for  a  period  which 
General,               he  has reason  to believe  will  be of  short duration  ; or 

                     (b)  is  suffering    from  an   illness  that -he has reason to  believe will 
                       be  of  short  duration, 
                 he  may,  acting  in  accordance   with  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister, 
                 by    instrument      under the Public Seal, appoint   any   person in   The 
                  Bahamas  to  be  his  deputy  during  such  absence  or  illness   and  in  that 
                  capacity  to perform  on  his  behalf  such  of  the  functions  of the  office  of 
                  Governor-General  as may  be  speoified  in that instrument. 
                     (2)  The  power  and  authority   of  the  Governor-General shall  not  be 
                  abridged,   altered   or  in any  way affeoted   by   the   appointment of  a 
                  deputy  under  this  Article,  and  in  the  exercise  of  any  function  that  is 

    exercisable   by   the     Governor-General  acting in   accordance  with  his 
    own     deliberate  judgment        or   after   consultation   with   any   person  or 
    authority  a  deputy  shall  conform  to  and  observe  any  instructions  that 
    the   Governor-General,   acting   in  like  manner,  may  address  to  him: 

       Provided  that  the  question  whether   or  not  a  deputy  has  conformed 
    to  or  observed  any   such  instructions  shall  not  be  enquired  into  in  any 
    court. 

       (3) A  person   appointed  as  a  deputy  under  this  Article  shall  hold  that 
    appointment  for  such  period   as  may  be  specified   in  the  instrument  by 
    which  he   is   appointed,   and  his   appointment  may  be  revoked   at  any 
    time  by     the   Governor-General         acting  in    accordance   with   the   advice 
    of  the  Prime  Minister. 

      35.-(1)  Parliament   may  prescribe   the  offices   that   are  to  constitute    
    the  personal  staff  of  the  Governor-General,   the  salaries  and  allowances    
                                                                                                      
    that  are  to  be  paid  to  the  members  of  the  staff  and  the  other  sums  that  
    are  to  be  paid  in  respect  of  the  expenditure  attaching  to  the  office   of 
    Governor-General. 

       (2)  Any    salaries  or  other   sums  prescribed   under   paragraph  (1)  of 
    this   Article   are   hereby     charged      on   and   shall    be   paid    out   of   the 
    Consolidated  Fund. 

       (3)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph   (4)   of  this  Article,  power 
    to  make  appointments  to  the  offices  for  the  time  being  prescribed  under 
    paragraph  (1) of  this  Article  as  offices  that  are  to  constitute  the  personal 
    staff  of  the  Governor-General,        and  to  remove  and  to  exercise  disciplin- 
    ary  control  over  persons  holding  or  acting  in  any  such  office,   is  hereby 
    vested    in   the   Governor-General  acting   in   accordance   with  his   own 
    deliberate  judgment. 

       (4)   The     Governor-General,         acting     in   accordance      with    his    own 
    deliberate judgment,  may  appoint  to  any  of  the  offices  prescribed  under 
    paragraph  (1)  of  this  Article  such  public  officers  as  he  may  select  from 
   a  list  submitted  by  the  Public  Service  Commission,  but- 
      (a)  the  provisions      of  paragraph       (3)  of  this   Article    shall   apply   in 
         relation   to  an  officer  so  appointed   as  respects   his   service  on  the 
         personal     staff   of   the   Governor-General         but   not   as   respects   his 
         service  as  a public  officer  ; 
      (b)   an   officer   so   appointed      shall   not,   during    continuance       on   the 
         personal   staff  of  the  Governor-General,  perform   the  functions   of 
         any  public  office  ; and 
       (c)  an  officer   so  appointed   may   at  any  time   be   appointed   by  the 
         Governor-General,          if  the   Public   Service     Commission        so  recom- 
         mend,  to  assume  or  resume   the  functions   of  a  public   office   and 
         he   shall  thereupon  vacate  -his  office   on  the   personal   staff,  of  the 
         Governor-General,          but   the    Governor-General         may,     in   his  own 
         deliberate  judgment,  decline  to  release   the  officer  for  that  appoint- 
         ment. 

      (5)  All  offices  prescribed  under  paragraph  (1)  of this  Article  as  offices 
   that  are  to  constitute  the  personal  staff  of  the  Governor  General  shall, 
   for  the  purposes  of  Chapter  VIII,  be  deemed  to  be  public  offices. 

 Public  Seal.       36.  The  Governor-General  shall   keep   and  use   the  Public Seal for 
                  sealing all  things  that  shall  pass  the  Public  Seal. 

 Oaths  to  be       37.   A  person  appointed  to  the  office  of  Governor-General or assum- 
 taken  by        
 Governor-        ing  the   functions   of  that  office under Article  33 of this Constitution 
 General.         shall,  before  entering  upon  the  duties  of  that  office,  take  and  subscribe 
                  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  an  oath  for  the  due  execution  of  the  office 
                  of  Governor-General   in  such  form  as  is  prescribed  by  any  law  in  force 
                  in  The  Bahamas,  such  oaths  being  administered  by  the  Chief  Justice  or 
                  such  other  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  as  may  be  designated  by  the 
                  Chief  Justice. 

                                                        CHAPTER  V 

                                                          PARLIAMENT 

                                                             PART    1 

                                                Composition of Parliwinent 
Establish-          38.  There  shall  be  a  Parliament  of  The  Bahamas  which  shall  consist 
nient  of 
Parliament.      of  Her  Majesty,  a  Senate  and  a  House  of Assembly. 

                                                             PART  2 

                                                          The  Senate 
Composition         39.-(1)  The  Senate  shall  consist   of  sixteen   members   (in   this   Con- 
of Senate.       stituition.  referred   to  as    "Senators   ")  who   shall   be   appointed   by   the 
                 Governor-General   by  instrument   under  the  Public  Seal   in  accordance 
                 with  the provisions  of  this Article. 

                     (2)  Nine  Senators  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Governor-General   acting 
                 in  accordance  with  the  advice  of the  Prime  Minister. 

                    (3)  Four  Senators  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Governor-General  acting 
                 in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition. 

                    (4)   Three    Senators shall   be appointed by  the Governor-General 
                  acting    in   accordance  with  the   advice   of the Prime Minister after 
                 consultation  with  the  Leader  of the  Opposition. 

                    (5)  Whenever  any  person  vacates  his  seat  as  a Senator  for  any  reason 
                 other   than   a  dissolution   of   Parliament,   the   Governor-General shall 
                 as  soon  as  practicable  appoint   a  person   to  fill  the  vacancy  under  the 
                 same  provisions  of  this  Article  as  those under  which  the  person  whose 
                 seat  has  became  vacant  was  appointed. 

Purpose  of         40.  In  the  exercise  of  the  functions   conferred  upon   him  by  Article 
appointment      39(4)  of  this  Constitution,  the  purpose  of  the  Prime  Minister  shall  be 
of certain       to  secure  that  the  political   balance of the Senate reflects that of the 
Senators.  
                 House   of  Assembly   at   the   time. 

Qualifi-             41.   Subject   to  the   provisions of Article 42 of  this Constitution, a 
cations  for     person  shall  be  qualified  to  be  appointed  as  a  Senator  if,  and  shall  not 
appointment 
as  Senator.     be  qualified  to  be  so  appointed  unless,  he  is  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas, 
                 of the  age  of  thirty  years  or  upwards  and  has  ordinarily  resided  in  The 
                 Bahamas  for  a  period   of  not   less  than  one   year  immediately   before 
                 the  date  of his  appointment. 

   42.--(1)  No  person   shall  be   qualified  to  be  appointed  as  a  Senator who-  
                                                                                                 
    (a) is  a  citizen  of  a  country  other than  The  Bahamas  having  become                  
      such  a citizen  voluntarily  ; 
   (b)   is,   by  virtue   of  his   own   act,  under any  acknowledgement of 
      allegiance,  obedience  or adherence  to a  foreign power or state  ; 
    (c)  is  disqualified  for  membership  of  the  Senate  by  any  law  in  force 
      in  The  Bahamas   enacted   in  pursuance   of  paragraph   (2)   of  this 
      Article  ; 
    (d) is  a  member  of the  House  of Assembly; 
    (e) has  been  adjudged  or  otherwise  declared  bankrupt  under  any  law 
      in  force  in  The  Bahamas  and  has  not  been  discharged; 
   ()   is  a  person  certified  to  be  insane  or  otherwise  adjudged  to  be  of 
      unsound  mind  under  any  law  in  force  in  The  Bahamas; 
    (g)  is  under  sentence  of  death  imposed  on  him   by  a  court  in  The 
      Bahamas,  or  is   serving  a  sentence  of  imprisonment   (by  whatever 
      name  called)  exceeding  twelve  months  imposed  on  him  by  such  a 
      court or  substituted  by  competent  authority  for some  other  sentence 
      imposed  on  him  by  such  a  court,  or  is  under  such  a  sentence  of 
      imprisonment   the   execution   of  which   has  been              suspended; 
   (h)  is  disqualified  for membership  of the House  of Assembly  by  virtue 
      of  any  law  in  force  in  The  Bahamas  by  reason  of  his  having  been 
      convicted  of  any  offence  relating  to  elections  ;  or 
   (')   is  interested   in   any  governmeint  contract  and  has   not  disclosed 
      to  -the Governor-General   the  nature  of  such   contraot  and  of  his 
      interest  therein. 

   (2)  Parliament  may  by  law  provide  that,  subject  to  such  exceptions 
and  limitations  (if  any)  as  may  be  prescribed  therein,  a  person  shall  be 
disqualified  for membership  of the  Senate  by virtue  of- 
    (a)  his  holding  or acting  in any  office  or appointment  specified  (either 
      individually  or  by  reference  to  a  class  of  office  or  appointment)  by 
      such  law; 
   (b)  his  belonging   to  any   armed  force   of  The   Bahamas   or  to  any 
      class of pei son so  specified  that  is  comprised  in  any  such  force  ;  or 
   (c)  his  belonging  to  any  police  force  of The  Bahamas  or  to  any  class 
      of  person  so  specified  that  is  comprised   in   any  such   force. 

   (3)  For the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (1)(g)  of this Article- 
   (a)  two  or  more  sentences  of  imprisonment  that  are  required  to  be 
      served  consecutively  shall  be  regarded  as  separate  sentences  if none 
      of  those  sentences  exceeds  twelve   months,  but  if  any  one  of  such 
      sentences  exceeds  that  term  they  shall be  regarded  as  one  sentence; 
      and 
   (b)  no  account  shall  be  taken  of  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  imposed 
      as  an  alternative  to  or  in  default  of  the  payment   of  a  fine. 

   43.-(1)  The  seat  of  a  Senator shall  became  vacant-                                      
                                                                                                  
   (a) upon      the   next    dissolution  of Parliament after he has been   
      appointed  ; 

    (b)   if he  resigns  by  writing  under  his  hand  addressed  to  the  President 
        of the  Senate,  or,  if  the  office  of  President  is vacant  or  the  President 
        is absent  from  The Bahamas,  to the  Vice-President   ; 
    (c)  if,  with  his  consent,  he  is   nominated  as  a  candidate  for  election 
        to  the  House  of Assembly  ; 
    (d) if  he  is   absent  from   The  Bahamas   for  a  period   exceeding   forty 
        days  at  any  time  when  the  Sena-to  is  sittig,  without  the  leave  of 
        the   President      given     in    accordance       with     the    provisions of 
       paragraph  (2)   of this Article   ; 
     (e) if he  ceases'to  be a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas 
    (f) subject  to  the  provisions   of  paragraph   (3)  of  this  Article,  if  any 
       circumstances   arise   that,   if  he   were   not   a      Senator,  would  cause 
       him  to  be   disqualified  for  appointment   as  such  by   virtue  of  sub- 
       paragraph  (a),   (b),   (c),    (e),  (f),   (g)  or  (h)  of  Article  42(1)   of  this 
       Constitution  or of  any  law  enacted  in  pursuance  of  Article  42(2) 
       of this  Constitution  ; 
    (q)  in  the  case  of  a  Senator  who  was  appointed  as  such  in  accordance 
       with   the   advice  of  the  Prime  Minister  or  in  accordance  with  the 
       advice  of the Leader  of the Opposition  or on  the advice  of the  Prime 
       Minister   after  consultation   with  the   Leader  of  the   Opposition,   if 
       the  Governor-General,   acting  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the 
       Prime  Minister  or  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Leader  of 
       the  Opposition  or  on  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister  after  con- 
       sultation  with  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  as the  case  may  be,  by 
       instrument  under  the  Public  Seal,  declares  the  seat  of  that  Senator 
       to be vacant; or 
   (h)  if he  becomes  interested  in any  government  contract: 
       Provided  that- 
          (i)  if  in   the   circumstances   it  appears  to  the   Senate   to  be  just 
             so  to  do,  the   Senate  may  exempt  any   Senator  from  vacating 
             his  seat   under   the  provisions       of  this   sub-paragraph,        if  that 
             Senator,  before  becoming  interested  in  such  contract  as  afore- 
             said  or  as   soon   as  practicable       after  becoming       so  interested, 
             discloses   to  the   Senate  the  nature  of   such  contract   and   his 
             interest  therein  ; 
          (ii)  if  proceedings   are  taken  under  a  law  made  under  Article  45 
             of  this Constitution  to determine  whether  a  Senator  has  vacated 
             his   seat  under   the  provisions  of  this   sub-paragraph   he  shall 
             be  declared  by   the  court  not  to  have  vacated   his  seat  if  he 
             establishes     to  the    satisfaction   of   the    court   that   lie,   acting 
             reasonably,      was   not     aware     that   he    was    or   had    become 
             interested  in  such  contract  ; and 
          (iii)  no  proceedings  under  the  preceding   sub-paragraph   shall  be 
             instituted  by   any  person  other  than  a  Senator  or  Member  of 
             the  House  of  Assembly. 

   (2)   The  President  of  the  Senate  may   grant  leave  to  any   Senator  to 
be  absent  from  The  Bahamas  for  any  period  not  exceeding  six  months 
at  any  one  time. 

    (3)  If tie  circumstances         such   as   are   referred    to  in   sub-paragraph 
(1)(f)  of -this Article  arise  because  a  Senator  is  under  sentence  of  death 
or  imprisonment,  adjudged  to  be  of  unsound  mind,  declared bankrupt  or 
convicted  or  reported  guilty  of  a  corrupt  or  illegal  practice  at  elections 

     and  if it is  open  to the  Senator to  appeal  against -the decision  (eilher with 
     the  leave  of  a  court  of  other  authority  or  without  such  leave),  he  shall 
     forthwith  cease  to  perform  his   functions   as   a  senator  but,   subject   to 
     paragraph  (4) of this Article,  he  shall not  vacate  his  seat  until the  expira- 
     tion of  a period  of  thirty days  thereafter: 
        Provided  that  -the President  of  the  Senate  may,   at  the  request  of  the 
     said  Senator,  from  time  to  time  extend  -that period  for  further  periods 
     of  thirty  days  to  enable  the   Senator  to  pursue   an   appeal   against  the 
     decision,  so, however,  that  extensions  of  time  exceeding  in  the  aggregate 
     one  hundred  and  fifty   days  shall  not  be   given  without   the  approval, 
     signified  by resolution,  of the  Senate. 

        (4)   If,  on  the  determination  of  any  appeal,   such  circumstances   con- 
     tinue  to  exist  and  no  further  appeal   is  open  to  the   Senator,  or  if,  by 
     reason  of  the  expiration  of  any  period  for  entering  an  appeal  or  notice 
     thereof   or  the   refusal   of  leave   to  appeal  or  for  any   other  reason,   it 
     ceases  to  be  open  to  the  Senator  to  appeal,   he  shall  forthwith   vacate 
     his  seat. 

        (5)  If  at  any  time   before  the   Senator  vacates   his   seat  such  circum- 
     stances  as  aforesaid  cease  to  exist,  his  seat  shall  not  become   vacant  on 
     the  expiration  of  the  period  referred  to  in  paragraph  (3)  of  this  Article 
     and  he   may  resume   the  performance   of  his  functions   as  a   Senator. 

        44.-(1)  When  the          Senate  first  meets after this Constitution comes President 
     into  operation   or  after  any  general   election  and  before   it  proceeds  to  and  Vice- 
     the  despatch  of  any  other  business,  the  Senate  shall,  in  accordance  with  President. 
     such  procedure  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the  rules  of  procedure   of  the 
     Senate,  elect  a  Senator  to  be  President  of  the  Senate ;  and,  if  the  office 
     of  President   falls   vacant        at   any  time,   the   Senate shall, as soon as- 
     practicable, proceed  in  like manner  'to fill  the  vacant office. 

        (2)   When   -the  Senate  first   meets   after   this   Constitution   comes   into 
     operation  or  after  any   general  election   and  before   it  proceeds  to  the 
     despatch   of  any   other  business   except   the   election   of   the   President, 
     it  shall   elect   a   Senator  to   be      Vice-President   of   the   Senate;   and   if 
     the  office   of  Vice-President   falls  vacant  at  any  time,  the  Senate   shall, 
     as soon  as  practicable,  elect a  Senator to  that  office. 

        (3)  The  Senate  shall  not  elect  a  Senator  who  is  a  Minister  or  Parlia- 
     mentary  Secretary  to  be   the  President  or  Vice-President   of  the  Senate. 

        (4)   A  person  shall  vacate  the  office   of  President  or  Vice-President   of 
     the  Senate- 
        (a)  if  he  ceases  to  be  a  Senator; 
        (b)  if  he is  appointed  to be  a  Minister or Parliamentary  Secretary 
        (c)  ff   he  announces  the  resignation   of  his   office  to  the   Senate  or  if, 
           by  writing  under  'his hand  addressed,   in  the  case  of  the  President, 
           to  the  Clerk  of  the  Senate  and,  in  the  case  of  the  Vice-President, 
           to   the   President   (or,  if   the  office  of   President  is  vacant  or  the 
           President   is   absent   from  The  Bahamas,  to  the  Clerk),   he  resigns 
           that  office  ; or 
        (d)  in  the  case  of  the  Vice-President,   if  he  is  elected  to  be  President. 

        (5)  If,  by   virtue  of  Article   43(3)  of  this   Constitution,   the  President 
    or  Vice-President         is  required    to  cease   to  perform   his   functions   as   a 
     Senator  he  shall   also   cease   to  perform   his   functions  as   President   or 

                  Vice-President, as the case may be, and those functions shall, until 
                  he   vacates  his   seat  in  the   Senate  or resumes the performance of the 
                  functions  of  his  office,  be  performed- 
                     (a)  in   the   case   of  the  President, by the  Vice-President or, if  the 
                        office  of  Vice-President  is  vacant  or  the  Vice-President  is  required 
                        to  cease  to  perform  -his functions  as  a  Senator by  virtue of Article 
                        43(3)  of  this   Constitution,  by   such   Senator  (not  being a  Minister 
                        or   Parliamentary Secretary)  as  the Senate  may  elect for  the 
                        purpose; 
                     (b)   in  the  case  of  the  Vice-President, by such  Senator  (not  being  a 
                        a  Minister  or  Parliamentary  Secretary)  as  the  Senate may  elect  for 
                        the  purpose. 

                     (6)  If  -the President  or  Vice-President  resumes  the  performance  of  his 
                 functions   as  a  Senator   in  accordance with  -the provisions   of  Article 
                  43(5)   of  this  Constitution,   he  shall   also resume  the  performance of 
                 his  functions  as  President  or  Vice-President,  as  the  case  may  be. 

Determi-            45.--(1)  The  Supreme  Court shall  have jurisdiction   to  hear  and  deter- 
nation  of       mine  any  question  whether- 
questions  as 
to member-           (a) any person  has been validly  appointed  as  a  Senator ;  or 
ship.               (b)  any   Senator  has  vacated  his   seat   or   is  required   under  Article 
                        43(3)   of   this  Constitution   to  cease   to   perform his functions as 
                       a  Senator. 

                    (2)  Subject   to  the   following provisions of this  Article and to the 
                 provisions  of  Article  43(1)  of this  Constitution,  Parliament  may  by  law 
                 make provision  with  respect  to- 
                    (a) -the  institution  of proceedings   for  the  determination  of  any  ques- 
                       tion  referred  to  in  paragraph  (I)   of  this  Article;   and 
                    (b)   the   powers,   practice   and  procedure of   the   Supreme   Court   in 
                       relation  to  any  such  proceedings. 

                    (3)  Proceedings  for  the  determination  of  any  question  referred  to  in 
                 paragraph   (1)  of  this  Article  shall   not  be   instituted  except  with   the 
                 leave  of a  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court. 

                    (4)  No  appeal  shall  lie  from  the  decision  of  a Justice  of the  Supreme 
                 Court  granting  or  refusing  leave  to  institute  proceedings   in  accordance 
                 with  paragraph  (3) of this Article. 

                                                             PART  3 

                                                    House  of Assembly 

Composition         46.-(1)  The  House  of  Assembly shall  consist of thirty-eight  members 
of House  of     or  such  greater  number  of  members  as  may  be  specified  by   an  Order 
Assembly.        made   by  the   Governor-General   in  accordance   with  the   provisions   of 
                 Article  70  of this  Constitution. 

                    (2)   The  members   of  the  House   shall   be  known   as   "Members of 
                 Parliament" and  shall  be   persons   who,   being qualified   for  election 
                 as  Members of  Parliament   in  accordance   with  the  provisions   of  this 
                 Constitution,  have  been  so  elected  in  the  manner  provided  by  any  law 
                 in  force in  The  Bahamas. 

    47.   Subject  -to The   provisions of  Article  48 of this  Constitution, a 
 person  shall  be  qualified  to  be  elected   as  a  member  of  the  House  of   
                                                                                                    
 Assembly  if,  and  shall  not  be  qualified  to  be  so  elected  unless,  he-n.                  
    (a) is  a  citizen  of  The  Bahamas  of  the  age  of  twenty-one   years  or   
       upwards  ; and 
    (b)  has  ordinarily  resided  in  The  Bahamas  for  a  period   of  not  less 
       than  one  year  immediately  before  the  date  of  his  nomination  for 
       election. 

    48.-(1)  No  person   shall  be  qualified  to  be  elected  as  a  member  of   
 the  House  of Assembly  who--                                                                      
                                                                                                     
    (a) is  a  citizen  of  a  country  other  than  The  Bahamas  having  become    
        such  a  citizen  voluntarily  ;                                                            
    (b)  is,  by    virtue   of  his   own  act, under any acknowledgment   of   
       allegiance,  obedience  or  adherence  to  a  foreign  power  or  state; 
     (c) is  disqualified  for  membership  of  the  House  of Assembly   by  any 
       law  enacted  in   pursuance  of  paragraph   (2)  of  -this Artiqle; 
    (d) has   been   adjudged   or  otherwise declared   bankrupt  under   any 
       law  in  force  in  The  Bahamas  and  has  not  been  discharged; 
     (e) is  a  person  certified  to  be  insane  or  otherwise  adjudged  to  be  of 
       unsound  mind  under  any  law  in  force  in   The  Bahamas; 
    (f)  is  under   sentence   of  death  imposed  on  him  by  a  court  in  The 
       Bahamas,   or  is   serving  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  (by  whatever 
        name  called)   exceeding   twelve  months   imposed  on  him   by  such 
        a   court or substituted  by competent authority for   some other 
        sentence   imposed   on  him   by   such  a   court,  or  is under such   a 
        sentence   of  imprisonment   the   execution   of  which   has   been   sus- 
        pended; 
     (g)  is  disqualified  for  membership  of the  House  of  Assembly  by  any 
        law  in  force  in  The  Bahamas  by  reason  of  his  holding,  or  acting 
       in,  any  office  the  functions  of  which  involve- 
           (i)  any  responsibility  for,  or  in  connection  with,  the  conduct  of 
              any  election;  or 
           (ii)  any   responsibility for the compilation   or  revision of any 
              electoral  register; 
     (h)  is  disqualified  for membership  of the House  of Assembly  by virtue 
       of  any  law  in  force  in  The  Bahamas  by  reason  of  his  having  been 
       convicted  of any  offence  relating  to elections; 
    (t)  is  a  Senator;  or 
    Q)  is   interested   in  any  government   contract  and  has   not  disclosed 
       the  nature  of  such contract  and of his  interest  therein  by  publishing 
       a  notice  in  the  Gazette  within  one  month  before  the  day  of election. 

    (2)   Parliament  may  by  law  provide  that,  subject  to  such  exceptions 
 and  limitations  (if  any)  as  may  be  prescribed  therein,  a  person  shall  be 
 disqualified  for  membership  of  the  House  of  Assembly  by  virtue  of- 
    (a) his  holding  or  acting  in  any  office  or  appointment  specified  (either 
       individually   or  by  reference   to   a  class  of  office   or  appointment) 
       by  such  law; 
    (b)   his  belonging   to  any   armed   force  of  The  Bahamas   or  to  any 
       class  of person  so  specified  that  is  comprised  in  any  such  force  ;  or 

                     (c)  his  belonging  to  any  police  force or to any class of person that 
                        is  comprised  in  any  such  force. 

                     (3)  For  the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (l)(/) of this  Article- 
                     (a)  two   or  more   sentences  of  imprisonment   that  are  required  to   be 
                        served   consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentencesif 
                        none    of  those   sentences   exceeds twelve   months, but if any one 
                        of  such  sentences  exceeds  that  term  they  shall  be  regarded  as  one 
                        sentence  ; and 
                     (b)   no  account  shall  be  taken  of  a  sentence  of  imprisonmenit  imposed 
                        as an  alternative  to or  in default  of the payment  of  a fine. 

Tenure  of          49.-(1)  Every  member   of  the  House  of  Assembly   shall  vacate   his 
office  of       seat  in  the  House- 
members  of 
House  of           (a)  upon  a  dissolution  of  Parliament; 
Assembly.           (b)   if he resigns it by writing under his hand addressed to the 
                       Speaker  or,  if  the   office  of Speaker is  vacant or the Speaker is 
                       absent  from  The Bahamas,  to the Deputy  Speaker  ; 
                    (c)   if he  is  absent  from  the  sittings of the House for such period  and 
                       and  in   such  circumstances   as   may  be  prescribed in the rules of 
                       procedure  of  the House  ;. 
                    (d)  if  he  ceases  to be  a citizen  of  The  Bahamas; 
                    (e)  subject  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (2) of this Article, if  any 
                       circumstances  arise  that,  if  he  were  not  a  member  of  the  House, 
                       would  cause  him  to  be  disqualified  for  election  as  such  by  virtue 
                       of  sub-paragraph  (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of Article  48(1) 
                       of  this  Constitution  ; or 
                    (I)   if he becomes  interested  in  any government  contract: 
                   Provided  that- 
                    (i)  if   in   the  circumstances it appears to the House of Assembly 
                       to   be  just   to   do   so,   the   House   of  Assembly may  exempt   any 
                       member  of  the  House  from  vacating  his  seat  under  the  provisions 
                       of  this  sub-paragraph,  if  that  member,  before  becoming  interested 
                       in  such  contract  as  aforesaid  or  as  soon  as  practicable  after becom- 
                       ing  so  interested,   discloses  to  the  House  the  nature  of  such  con- 
                       tract  and  his  interest  therein 
                   (ii)  if   proceedings    are  taken  under   a  law  made   under   Article 51 
                      of  this  Constitution  to  determine  whether  a  member  of  the  House 
                      has  vacated   his   seat  under   the  provisions   of  this  sub-paragraph 
                      he  shall  be  declared  by  the  court  -not to have vacated his seat if he 
                      establishes  to  the  satisfaction   of  the  court  that  he,  acting  reason- 
                       ably,  was  not  aware  that  he  was  or  had  become  interested  in  such 
                      contract  ; and 
                   (iii)  no   proceedings -under  the   preceding sub-paragraph shall  be 
                      instituted  by   any  person   other  than  a  Senator  or  member  of  the 
                      House  of  Assembly. 
                   (2)  If  circumstances       such  as  are  referred  to  in  sub-paragraph  (1)(e) 
                of this  Article  arise  because  any  member  of the  House  is  under  sentence 
                of   death   or     imprisonment, declared     bankrupt,   adjudged to be of 
                unsound  mind  or  convicted  of  an  offence  relating  to  elections  and  it  is 
                open  to  the  member  to  appeal   against  the  decision   (either  with   the 
               leave  of  a   court  or  other  authority  or  without such  leave),  he   shall 


    forthwith   cease  to   perform  his   functions   as  a  member   of  the  House 
    but,   subject  to  paragraph  (3)  of  this   Article,  he  shall  not  vacate  his 
    seat  until the expiration  of a period  of thirty  days thereafter: 
       Provided  that  the  Speaker  may,  at  the  request  of  the  member,  from 
    time  to  time  extend  that  period   for  further  periods   of  thirty  days  to 
    enable   the     member to  pursue  an appeal against the decision, so, 
    however,      that    extensions     of   time    exceeding in   the aggregate  one 
    hundred  and  fifty  days  shall  not be  given  without  the  approval,  signified 
    by  resolution,  of  the  House  of Assembly. 

       (3)  If,  on  the  determination  of  any  appeal,  such   circumstances  con- 
    ,inue  to  exist  and  no  further  appeal  is  open  to  the  member,  or  if,  by 
    reason  of  -the expiration  of  any  period  for  entering  an  appeal  or  notice 
    thereof   or  the  refusal  of   leave  to  appeal   or  for  any   other  reason,   it 
    ceases  to  be  open  to  the  member  to  appeal,  lie  shall  forthwith  vacate 
    his  seat. 

       (4)   If  at  any  time  before  the  member  vacates  his  seat  such  circum- 
    stances   as  aforesaid  cease   to  exist,  his   seat  shall  not  become  vacant 
    on  the  expiration   of  the   period  referred  -to in  paragraph   (2)   of  this 
    Article   and   he   may resume the performance of his functions as a 
    member  of the  House. 

       50.-(1)  When  the  House  of  Assembly   first  meets  after  any  general   Speaker  and 
    election  and  before  it  proceeds  to  the  despatch  of  any  other  business,   Deputy 
    the  House  shall,  in  accordance   with  such   procedure  as  may  be  pre-   Speaker. 
    scribed  by  the  rules  of  procedure  of  the  House,  elect  from  among  the 
    members       who     are   not   Ministers      or   Parliamentary Secretaries one 
    member   to  be  the  Speaker  of  the  Assembly   and   another  member  to 
    be  Deputy   Speaker;  and,  if  the  office   of  Speaker  or  Deputy  Speaker 
    falls  vacant   at  any  time  before  the  next  dissolution  of  the  House   of 
    Assembly,   the  House   shall,   as   soon   as  practicable,   proceed   in like 
    manner  to  fill  the  vacant  office. 

       (2)  A person  shall vacate the  office  of Speaker  or Deputy  Speaker- 
       (a) if he  ceases  to  be  a member  of the House  of Assembly: 
       Provided  that  the  Speaker  shall  not  vacate  his  office  by  reason  only 
   that  he  has  ceased  to  be  a  member   on  a  dissolution  of  Parliament, 
   until  the  House  of  Assembly   first  meets  after  that  dissolution; 
       (b)   if  he  is  appointed  to  'be  a  Minister  or  Parliamentary   Secretary; 
       (c)  if  he  announces   the  resignation   of  his  office   to  the  House   of 
         Assembly  or  if,  by  writing  under  his  hand  addressed,  in  the  case 
         of  the  Speaker,  to  the  Clerk  of  the  House  and,  in  the  case  of  the 
         Deputy  Speaker,  to  the   Speaker  (or,  if  the  office   of  Speaker  is 
         vacant  or  the  Speaker  is  absent  from  The  Bahamas,  to  the  Clerk), 
         he  resigns  that  office  ; or 
      (d)  in the case  of the Deputy  Speaker,  if he  is elected to be Speaker. 

      (3)  If  by  reason  of  Article  49(2)  of  this  Constitution  the  Speaker  or 
   Deputy      Speaker   is   required  to  cease   to  perform  his  functions  as  a 
   member  of  the  House  of  Assembly,  he  shall  also  cease  to  perform  his 
   functions   as   Speaker  or  Deputy   Speaker   and   those   functions   shall, 
   until  he  vacates  his  seat  in  the  House  or  resumes   the  performance   of 
   the  functions  of  his  office,   be  performed- 

                      (a)  in  the case of the  Speaker, by the  Deputy Speaker or, if  the 
                        office   of Deputy Speaker is  vacant or   the   Deputy Speaker is 
                        required     to  cease   to  perform his functions  as  a member of the 
                        House  of  Assembly  by  virtue  of  Article  49(2)  of -this Constitution, 
                        by  such  member  (not  being a  Minister  or  Parliamentary   Secretary) 
                        as  the  House  may  elect  for  the  purpose  ; 
                     (b)   in   the  case  of  the  Deputy   Speaker,  by  such   member  (not  being 
                        a  Minister  or  Parliamentary  Secretary)  as  the  House  may  elect  for 
                        the  purpose. 
                     (4)   If  the  Speaker  or   Deputy   Speaker  resumes   the  performance   of 
                  his  functions  as   a  member  of  the   House  in  accordance  with   the   pro- 
                  visions  of  Article  49(4)  of  this  Constitution, he shall  also resume the 
                  performance  of  his  functions  as  Speaker  or  Deputy  Speaker,  as  the  case 
                  may  be. 

                                                 Justices  of  the  Supreme 
 Determi-            51.--(1)   An  Election  Court,  consisting  of  -two  
 nation  of       Court  appointed  by   the  Chief  Justice   or,  -if for  any  reason   two  such 
 questions  as 
 to  member-      Justices   are  not   available,  one  such   Justice   and  the  Chief  Magistrate 
 ship.            or  a  Stipendiary  and  Circuit  Magistrate  appointed  by  the  Chief  Justice, 
                  shall  have  jurisdiction   to  hear  and   determine  any   question  whether- 
                     (a)  any  person  has  been  validly  elected   as  a  member  of  the  House 
                        of  Assembly  ; or 
                     (b)   any  member  of  the  House  of  Assembly has  vaoated   his  seat  or 
                        is  required,   under  the  provisions  of  Article 49(2) of this Constitu- 
                        tion,  to  cease  to  perform  his  functions  as  a  member. 
                     (2)  Subject    to   the   following  provisions of  this  Article and to the 
                  provisions  of  Article  49(1)  of  this  Constitution,  Parliament  may   make, 
                  or  provide  for  the  making  of  provision,  with  respect  to- 
                     (a) the  institution  of  proceedings  for  the  determination   of  any  ques- 
                        tion  referred  to  in  paragraph  (1) of this  Article  ;  and 
                     (b)  the   powers,   practice       and  procedure of an Election Court in 
                        relation  to  any  such  proceedings. 
                     (3)  The  determination  by  an  Election  Court  of  any  question  referred 
                 to  in  paragraph  (1) of  this Article  shall  be  final. 
                     (4)  Proceedings      for  the   determination of any question referred to 
                 in  paragraph   (1)  of  this  Article  shall  not  be  instituted  except  with  the 
                 leave  of a  Justice  of  -the Supreme  Court. 

                     (5)  An   appeal  shall  lie  to  the  Court   of  Appeal   on  a  point  of  law 
                 from  the  decision  of  a Justice  of the  Supreme  Court  granting  or refusing 
                 leave    to   institute proceedings in  accordance with this Article; but, 
                 subject  as  aforesaid,  that  decision  shall  be  final. 

                                                             PART   4 

                                        Powers and Procedure  of Parliament 
Power  to            52.--(1)  Subject   to  the   provisions   of  this  Constitution, Parliament 
make  laws.      may   make   laws   for  the   peace,   order  and  good   government of  The 
                 Bahamas. 
                    (2)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Articles  60, 61 and  62  of  this  Con- 
                 stitution,  the  power  of  Parliament  to  make  laws  shall  be  exercised  by 
                 Bills  passed   by  both  Houses,  either  without  amendment  or  with  such 

  amendments   only  as   are  agreed  to   by  both   Houses,                  and  assented   to 
  by    the   Governor        General      in   accordance        with    Article     63    of   this 
  Constitution. 

     53.--(1)   Without prejudice to.the  generality of Article 52(1) of Privileges  of 
  this  Constitution  and  subject  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (2)   of  this Parliament. 
  Article,   Parliament   may   by         law  determine   the  privileges, immunities 
  and  powers  of  the  Senate  and  the  House  of  Assembly  and  the  members 
  thereof. 

     (2)  No  process   issued  by  any  court  in   the  exercise  of  its  civil  juris- 
  diction  shall  be  served  or  executed   within  the  precincts   of  the  Senate 
  or  the  House  of  Assembly  while  it  is  sitting,  or  through   the  President 
  or  the  Speaker,  the  Clerk  or  any   other  officer   of  either  House. 

     54.-(1)  Subject   -to the  provisions   of   this   Article,   Parliament   may,  Alteration 
  by   an  Act   of   Parliament   passed   by  both   Houses,  alter  any  of  the of this  Con- 
  provisions      of  this   Constitution  or (in  so  far  as it  forms part of the stitution. 
  law    of  The   Bahamas)         any    of   the   provisions of   The   Bahamas In- 
  dependence  Act,   1973. 

     (2)   In  so  far  as  it  alters- 
     (a)  Articles   32,  33,   34,   35,   41,  42,   43,   47,  48,  49,   79,   107,   108,   109, 
         110, 111,  112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121,  122, 
        123,   124,   125,   126,   128,   129,  130,   131,   132,   133,   134,  135  or  136  of 
        this  Constitution  ;  or 
     (b)  Articles     127  or    137   of  this   Constitution  in   their  application   to- 
        any    of   the    provisions       specified     in   sub-paragraph         (a)    of   this 
       paragraph, 
 a  Bill  for  an  Act  of  Parliament  under  this  Article  shall  not  be  passed 
 by  Parliament  unless  :- 
    (i)  at  the  final  voting   thereon   in  each  House   it  is  supported  by  the 
        votes  of  not  less  than  two-thirds  of  all  the  members  of  each  House, 
       and 
    (ii)  the   Bill,   after   its  passage   through   both        Houses,  has  been sub- 
       mitted  to  .the electors  qualified  to  vote  for the  election  of  members 
        of   the   House   of  Assembly          and,   on   a   vote   in   such   manner   as 
       Parliament  may  prescribe   the  majority  of  the  electors  voting  have 
       approved  the  Bill. 

    (3)  In  so  far  as  it  alters- 
    (a)  this  Article; 
    (b)  Articles   2,   3,   4,  5,   6,  7,   8,   9,  10,   11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18, 
        19,  20,  21,   22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31,   38,  39,  40, 45,  46,  51, 
       52,   60,  61,   62,   65,  66,   67,  68,   69,   70,  71,   72,   93,   94,   95,   96,  97, 
       98,  99,   100,   101,  102,   103,   104  or  105  of  this  Constitution  ; or 
    (c)  Articles   106,   127  or  137       of  this  Constitution  in  their  application 
       to  any  of the provisions  specified  in  sub-paragraphs  (a) or  (b)  of this 
       paragraph  ;  or 
    (d)  any   of  the  provisions   of  The  Bahamas  Independence   Act   1973, 
a  Bill  for  an  Act  of  Parliament  under  this  Article   shall  not  be  passed 
by  Parliament  unless: - 
    (J)  at  the  final  voting  thereon   in  each  House  it  is  supported  by  the 
      votes  of  not  less  than   three-quarters   of  all  the  members   of  each 
      House,  and 

                     (ii)   the   Bill, after  its passage through  both  Houses has  been sub- 
                        mitted  to  the  electors  qualified  to  vote  for the election of members 
                         of  the  House  of  Assembly   and,  on  a  vote   taken  in  such  manner 
                         as   Parliament  may   prescribe   the  majority   of  the   electors  voting 
                         have  approved  the  Bill. 

                      (4)   In  this  Article- 
                     (a) references      to  any   of  the  provisions   of  this Constitution or the 
                         Bahamas   Independence           Act   1973   include   references to any law 
                        that  amends  or replaces  that  provision  ;  and 
                     (b)  references  -to the  alteration  of  any  of  the  provisions  of this Con- 
                        stitution  or   The  Bahamas   Independence   Act   1973  include  refer- 
                        ences    to   the   amendment,   modification or  re-enactment   with   or 
                        without   amendment   or  modification, of that provision, the  sus- 
                        pension  or  repeal  of  that  provision  and  the  making  of  a  different 
                        provision  in  lieu  of  that  provision. 

                     (5)  No  Act   of  Parliament  shall  be  construed as altering  this  Con- 
                  stitution  unless  it  is  stated  in  the  Act  that it is an Act for that purpose. 

Regulation           55.-(1)  Subject  to  the  provisions   of  this  Constitution,  each  House 
of procedure      may  regulate  its  own  procedure  and  for  this  purpose  may make  rules  of 
Parliament.       procedure. 
                     (2)  Each  House  may  act  notwithstanding  any  vacancy  in  its  member- 
                 ship,  and  the  presence  or participation  of  any  person  not  entitled  to  be 
                  present  at  or  to  participate  in  the  proceedings   of  the  House  shall  not 
                  invalidate  those  proceedings. 

Presiding  in        56.-(1)   The   President   of  the   Senate  or,  in  his  absence, the Vice- 
the  Senate       President  or,  if  they   are  both  absent,   a  Senator  (not being a Minister 
and  House       or  Parliamentary  Secretary)  elected   by  the  Senate  for  that  sitting  shall 
of ASsembly. 
                 preside  at  each  sitting  of the  Senate. 

                     (2)  The   Speaker  or,  in  his   absence,  the  Deputy Speaker or, if  they 
                  are  both   absent,   a  member   (not  being a Minister or Parliamentary 
                  Secretary)  elected  by  the  House  for  that  sitting  shall  preside  at each 
                 sitting  of the  House  of  Assembly. 

                     (3)  References  in  this  Article  to  circumstances  in  which  the  President, 
                 Vice-President,   Speaker  or  Deputy  Speaker  is  absent  include  references 
                 to   circumstances        in   which     the office of President, Vice-President, 
                  Speaker  or Deputy  Speaker  is  vacant. 

Quorum.              57.--(1)  If  at  any  time  during  a  sitting  of  either  House  objection  is 
                  taken  by  a member  that  there  is not  a quorum  present  and,  after  such 
                 interval  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the  rules  of procedure  of  that  House, 
                 the  person  presiding  ascertains  that  there  is  still  not  a  quorum  present, 
                 he  shall  thereupon  adjourn  the  House. 
                    (2)  For  the purposes  of this Article- 
                    (a)  a  quorum  of  the  Senate  shall   consist  of  six  Senators  including 
                        the  person  presiding  ; and 
                     (b)  a  quorum  of  the  House  of Assembly  shall consist  of ten  members 
                       including      the  person      presiding, or of such greater number   of 
                       members  as  may  be  specified  by  an Order  made  by  the  Governor- 
                        General   in   accordance   with  the  provisions   of  Article  70  of  this 
                        Constitution. 

    58.-(l)  Save       as   is  otherwise      provided      in   -this  Constitution, all Voting. 
 questions  proposed   for  decision  in  either  House  shall  be  determined 
 by  a  majority  of the votes  of the  members  thereof present  and  voting. 

    (2)   The  person  presiding  in  either House  shall  not  vote- 
    (a) unless   on   any  question   the  votes  are  equally  divided,   in  which 
       case  he  shall  have  and  exercise  a casting  vote  ; or 
    (b)  except   in  -the case   of   the  final   vote   on   a  Bill   for   an  Act  of 
       Parliament  under  Article  54  of  this  Constitution  in  which  case  he 
       shall  have  an original  vote. 

    59.--()     Subject   to  the  provisions   of  this   Constitution   and   of  the Introduction 
 rules   of  procedure   of   the   Senate   or   the  House   of  Assembly,  as  the of Bills, etc. 
 case  may  be,  any  member  of  either  House  may  introduce  any  Bill  or 
 propose   any  motion  for   debate   in,   or  may   present   any  petition   to. 
 that  House,  and  the  same  shall  be  debated  and  disposed  of  according 
 to the  rules  of procedure  of that House. 

   (2)  A   Bill  other   than   a  Money  Bill  may   be   introduced   in   either 
House,  but  a  Money  Bill  shall  not  be  introduced  in  the  Senate. 

   (3)  Except   on   the   recommendation of the  Cabinet signified  by   a 
 Minister,  the  House  of  Assembly  shall  not- 
   (a)  prcceed  upon  any  Bill  (including  any  amendment  to  a  Bill)  which. 
      in   the   opinion      of   the   person     presiding,     makes     provision for 
      imposing   or  increasing  any  tax,  for  imposing  any   charge  on  the 
      Consolidated  Fund  or  any  other  public  fund  or  altering  any  such 
      charge     otherwise      than   by    reducing     it  or   for   compounding  or 
       remitting  any  debt  due  to  The  Bahamas;  or 
    (b)  proceed  upon  any  motion  (including  any  amendment  to  a  motion) 
       the  effect  of  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  person  presiding,  is  that 
      provision  shall be made  for  any  of  the purposes  aforesaid. 

   (4)   The  Senate  shall  not- 
   (a)  proceed  upon  any  Bill,   other  than  a  Bill  sent  from  the  House  of 
      Assembly,   or  any  amendment   to  a  Bill  which,   in  the  opinion  of 
      the  person  presiding,   makes  provision  for  imposing   or  increasing 
      any  tax,   for  imposing   any  charge   on  the  Consolidated  Fund  or 
      any  other  public  fund  or  altering  any  such  charge  otherwise  than 
      by  reducing  it  or  for  compounding  or  remitting  any  debt  due  to 
      The  Bahamas  ; or 
   (b)  proceed  upon  any  motion  (including  any  amendment  to  a  motion) 
      the  effect  of  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  person  presiding,  is  that 
      provision   shall  be  made   for  any  of  the  purposes   aforesaid. 

   60.-l)  Subject  to  the  provisions   of  this  Constitution,   if  a  Money   
Bill,  having   been  passed   by   the  House  of  Assembly  and   sent  to  the    
Senate  at  least  one  month  before  the  end  of  the  session,  is  not  passed                        
by   the   Senate  without   amendment  within   one  month  after  it  is  sent   
to  that  House,  the  Bill  shall,  unless  the  House  of  Assembly   otherwise 
resolves,  be  presented   to  the  Governor-General   for  his  assent  notwith- 
standing  that  the  Senate  has  not  consented  to  the  Bill. 

   (2)   There   shall  be   endorsed   on  every   Money   Bill  when   it  is   sent 
to  -the Senate  the  certificate  of  the  Speaker  signed  by  him  that  it  is  a 
Money  Bill;  and  there   shall  be  endorsed  on   any  Money  Bill  that  is 

                    presented   to  the  Governor-General for  assent   in  pursuance   of  para- 
                    graph  (1)  of  this  Article  the   certificate of  the  Speaker signed by him 
                    that  it  is  a  Money  Bill and  that the  provisions of that  paragraph have 
                    been  complied  with. 

  Restriction          61.-(1)  If  any  Bill  other  than  a  Money  Bill  is  passed  by  the  House 
  on  powers        of  Assembly  in   two  successive  sessions  (whether  or  not  Parliament  is 
  of  Senate  as        Asml 
  to  Bills         dissol'ved  between   those   sessions)  and,  having  been  sent to the Senate 
  other than        in   each   of  those   sessions  at   least one month before the end of the 
  Money  Bills.     session,   is  rejected  by the Senate in  each of those sessions, that Bill 
                    shall,   on  its  rejection   for  the   second  time by the Senate, unless the 
                    House  of  Assembly   otherwise  resolves,   be  presented  to  the  Governor- 
                    General   for  assent  notwithstanding  that  the  Senate  has  not  consented 
                    to  the  Bill: 
                      Provided  that  the  foregoing  provisions   of  this  paragraph   shall  not 
                   have  effect  unless  at  least  nine  months  have  elapsed  between   the  date 
                   on   which   the  Bill   is  passed   by  the  House of Assembly in the first 
                   session  and  the  date  on  which  it  is passed  by the  House  of Assembly in 
                   the  second  session. 

                      (2)   For  the  purposes  of  this  Article a  Bill that is sent to the Senate 
                   from  the  House  of  Assembly in  any session  shall  be   deemed   to  be 
                   the  same  Bill  as  a  former  Bill sent to the Senate in the preceding session 
                   if,  when   it  is  sent  to  the  Senate,  it is identical with the former Bill 
                   or  contains  only  such  alterations  as  are  certified  by  the  Speaker  to  be 
                   necessary  owing  to  the  time   that  has   elapsed   since   the   date of the 
                   former  Bill   or   to  represent   any  amendments   which  have   been  made 
                   by  the  Senate  in  the  former  Bill  in  the  preceding  session. 
                      (3)  The   House   of   Assembly   may, if it thinks fit, on the passage 
                   through  the  House  of  a  Bill  that  is  deemed  to  be  the  same  Bill  as  a 
                   former  Bill  sent  to  the  Senate   in  the  preceding   session,   suggest   any 
                   amendments   without   inserting  the   amendments   in  the   Bill,   and   any 
                   such  amendments   shall  be  considered  by  the  Senate,  and,  if  agreed  to 
                   by  the   Senate,  shall   be   treated   as  amendments   made   by   the  Senate 
                   and  agreed   to   by   the  House   of  Assembly;   but  the   exercise   of  this 
                  power  by  the  House  of  Assembly  shall  not  affect  the  operation  of  this 
                  Article  in  the  event  of  the  rejection  of  the  Bill  in  the  Senate. 
                      (4)  There shall be inserted in any Bill that is presented to  the 
                  Governor-General           for  assent  in  pursuance   of  this Article any amend- 
                  ments  that  are  certified  by  the  Speaker  to  have  been  made  in  the  Bill 
                  by  the  Senate  in  -the second  session  and  agreed  to  by  -the Assembly. 

                      (5) There   shall  be  endorsed   on  any Bill that is presented to the 
                  Governor-General   for  assent  in  pursuance  of  this  Article  the  certificate 
                  of  -the Speaker   signed  by  him  thait  the  provisions   of  this  Article  have 
                  been  complied  with. 
                     (6)   The  provisions   of  this  Article  shall   not  apply to  a Bill which 
                  is   required   by   Article   54   of  this   Constitution   to be passed by both 
                  Houses. 

Provisions           62.,-(1)  In  Articles  59,  60  and  61   of  this  Constitution  "Money   Bill" 
relating to       means  a  public  Bill  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Speaker,  contains  only 
Articles  59,     provisions  dealing  with  all  or  any  of  the  following  matters,  namely,  the 
60  and  61.      imposition,  repeal,   remission,   alteration   or  regulation   of  taxation;  the 
                  imposition,  for  the  payment   of   debt   or  other   financial  purposes,   of 
   charges  on  the  Consolidated  Fund  or  any other  public  funds  or on  monies 
  provided  by  Parliament  or  the  variation  or  repeal  of  any  such  charges  : 
  the  grant  of  money  to  the  Crown  or  to  any  authority  or  person,  or  the 
  variation   or  revocation   of   any  such   grant,   the   appropriation,   receipt, 
   custody,  investment,        issue  or  audit  of  accounts  of  public  money;   the 
  raising   or  guarantee   of   any         loan    or   the   repayment       thereof,  or   the 
   establishment,       alteration,    administration        or   abolition     of   any   sinking 
   fund  provided  in  connection  with  any  such  loan  ; or  subordinate  matters 
   incidental   to  any   of  the   matters  aforesaid;   and  in  this  paragraph  the 
   expressions      "  taxation  ",    "  debt ",   "  public    fund ",     "  public    money", 
   and  "  loan  "  do  not  include  any  taxation   imposed,  debt  incurred,   fund 
   or  money   provided  or  loan   raised  by           any   local  authority  or  body  for 
   local  purposes. 
      (2)  For  the  purposes   of  Article   61        of  this   Constitution,  a   Bill  shall 
   be deemed  to  be  rejected  by  the  Senate  if- 
      (a) it  is not passed  by  the  Senate  without  amendment  ; or 
      (b)   it   is   passed   by   the   Senate   with   any     amendment   which  is   not 
         agreed  to  by  the House  of  Assembly. 
      (3)  Whenever   the   office  of  Speaker   is  vacant   or  the   Speaker  is   for 
   any   reason     unable   to  perform        any    function     conferred   upon   him    by 
  paragraph       (1) of  this  Article  or  by  Articles  60  or  61   of this  Constitution, 
  that  function  may  be  performed   by  the  Deputy  Speaker. 
      (4) Any   certificate      of  the   Speaker   or  Deputy   Speaker   given   under 
  Article  60  or  61  of  this  Constitution  shall  be  conclusive  for  all  purposes 
   and shall  not be  questioned  in  any  court. 

      63.-(1)  A   Bill   shall   not   become law   until   the Governor-General   Assent  to 
  has    assented     thereto   in    Her   Majesty's   name   and   on  Her   Majesty's   Bills. 
  behalf  and  has  signed  it in  token  of  such  assent. 
      (2)   Subject  to  the  provisions   of  Articles  60  and  61           of  this  Constitu- 
   tion,  a  Bill  shall  be  presented  to  the  Governor-General   for assent  if,  and 
   shall  not  be  so preseited  unless,  it  has  been  passed  by  both  Houses  either 
  without   amendment           or  with   such   amendments           only   as   are  agreed  to 
   by  both  Houses. 
      (3)  Any  Bill  to  which  Article  54(2)  or  (3) of  this  Constitution  applies 
   shall  be  presented  to  the  Governor-General   endorsed  with  certificates  of 
  the  President  of  the  Senate  and  the  Speaker  that  it  has  been  passed  by 
   the   requisite   majorities      in   accordance   with  whichever           of  those   para- 
   graphs  applies  to  the  Bill,  and  with   a  certificate   of  the  Parliamentary 
   Registrar     that  it   has   been   approved        by   the   majority   of   the   electors 
  voting  on  the  Bill. 
      (4)  When  a  Bill  is  presented  to  the  Governor-General   for  assent  he 
   shall  signify  that   he  assents   or  that  he   withholds   assent. 

     64.  No  member  of  either  House  shall   take  part  in   the   proceedings  Oath  of 
  thereof  unless  he  has  -taken 'the  oath  of  allegiance  in  such  manner  as  is allegiance. 
  prescribed  by  any  law  in  force  in  The Bahamas: 
      Provided  that  the  election  of  a  President  of  the  Senate  or the  election 
  of   a   Speaker   of   the  House   of  Assembly   may take  place  before the 
  members  of  'the  Senate  or  the  House  of  Assembly,  as  the  case  may  be, 
  have  taken  such  oath. 

                                                               PART    5 

                                         Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution 
   Sessions  of        65.-(l)  Each  session  of  Parliament  shall  be  held  at  such  place  and 
   Parliament.      commence  at  such  time  as  the  Governor-General  may  by  proclamation 
                    appoint. 

                       (2)  The   time   appointed   for  the   commencement of any session of 
                    Parliament      shall   be   such that a period of twelve months does not 
                    intervene   between  the   end   of one session and the first sitting of 
                    Parliament  in  the next  session. 

  Prorogation         66.-(1)  The  Governor-General,   aoting  in  accordance  with  the  advice 
  and              of  the   Prime  Minister,   may at any time  by proclamation  prorogue 
  dissolution 
  of               Parliament. 
  Parliament.         (2)   The  Governor-General,   acting  in   accordance  with  the  advice   of 
                   the    Prime  Minister,  may  at  any  time    by    proclamation        dissolve 
                   Parliament: 
                      Provided that if  the   office  of   Prime   Minister   is vacant and the 
                   Governor-General   considers  that  there  is  no  prospeot  of  his  being  able 
                   within   a  reasonable   time  to  appoint  to  that  office a person who can 
                   command  the  confidence   of  a  majority  of  the  members   of  the  House 
                   of  Assembly,  he  shall  dissolve  Parliament. 

                      (3)  Subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this Article, Parlia- 
                   ment,  unless  sooner  dissolved,  shall  continue for five years from the date 
                   of  its  first  sitting  after  any  dissolution and shall then stand  dissolved. 

                      (4)   At   any   time   when      The  Bahamas   is   at  war, Parliament may 
                   extend the  period  of  five  years  specified  in  paragraph (3) of this Article 
                  for  not more  than twelve months  at  a time: 
                      Provided   that  the   life   of  Parliament   shall   not  be   extended   under 
                  this  paragraph  for more than  two  years. 
                     (5)  If,   between     a   dissolution   of Parliament and the next ensuing 
                  general  election  of  members  to  -the House  of  Assembly,  an  emergency 
                  arises  of  such  a  nature  -that, in  the  opinion  of  the  Prime  Minister,  it  is 
                  necessary  for  the  two Houses  or  either  of  them  to  be  summoned  before 
                  that   general     election   can   be   held,   the   Governor-General, acting in 
                  accordance   with   the  advice  of   the  Prime  Minister,  may   summon  the 
                  two    Houses   of  the      preceding   Parliament, and that Parliament shall 
                  thereupon  be  deemed  (except  for  the purposes  of Article  67  of this  Con- 
                  stitution) not to have  been  dissolved but  shall be deemed  (except as  afore- 
                  said)  to  be  dissolved  on the date on which the polls are  held in the next 
                  ensuing  general  election. 

General              67.-(1)  After  every  dissolution  of  Parliament  the  Governor-General 
elections,        shall  issue   writs   for   a  general   election of members of the House of 
bye-elections    Assembly  returnable  within  ninety days  from that  dissolution. 
and 
appointment         (2)   As   soon  as  may  be  after  every general   election   the  Governor- 
of  Senators.    General   shall   proceed   under   Article  39   of  this Constitution   to   the 
                 appointment  of  Senators. 
                    (3)   Whenever  any  person  vacates  his  seat  as  a  member  of  the  House 
                 of  Assembly  for  any  reason  other  than  a  dissolution  of Parliament,  the 


 Governor-General   shall  issue  a  writ  for  the  election  of  a  member  to  fill 
 the  vacancy  and  such  election   shall  be  held  within  sixty  days  after  the 
 occurrence   of   the  vacancy   or,  where  -the question  whether   a  vacancy 
 has  occurred  is  determined  under  Article  51   of  4his  Constitution,  after 
 that  determination,   unless  Parliament   is         sooner  dissolved   or  the  date 
 by  which  Parliament  will  be  dissolved  undetr  the  provisions  of  Article  66 
 of  this   Constitution  is  less   than  four  months   after   the  occurrence   of 
 the  vacancy  or,  as   he  case  may  be,  that  determination. 

                                           PART    6 

                            Delimitation of  Constituencies 

    68.  The  Bahamas   shall  be  divided  into  thirty-eight  constituencies   or  
 such   greater  number   as   may   be  provided   for  by   an.  Order  made   by   encies. 
 the   Governor-General   in   accordance   with  the  provisions   of  Article   70 
 of this  Constitution  and  each  such  constituency  shall  return  one  member 
to  the  House  of  Assembly. 

   69.-(1)  There shall be a  Constituencies   Commission  for    
Bahamas   (in  this   and   the  next  following   Article  referred  to  as the    
                                                                                                 
Commission ").  

   (2)   The  Members  of  the  Commission  shall  be- 
   (a)  the  Speaker  who  shall  be  Chairman  ; 
   (b)  a  Justice  of  the   Supreme  Court  who  shall  be  Deputy   Chairman 
      and   shall   be    appointed  by   the   Governor-General            acting  on   the 
      recommendation  of  the  Chief  Justice; 
   (c)  two  members  of  the  House  of  Assembly  who  shall  be  appointed 
      by   the  Governor-General   acting  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of 
      the  Prime  Minister;  and 
   (d) one  member  of  the  House  of  Assembly  who  shall  be   appointed 
      by  the  Governor-General   acting  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of 
      the  Leader  of  the  Opposition. 

   (3)  The  office  of  a member  of  the  Commission  shall  become  vacant- 
   (a) if  he  ceases   to  be   the  Speaker,  a  Justice   of  the   Supreme   Court 
      or  a  member  of  the  House  of  Assembly,  as  the  case  may  be  ;  or 
   (b)  in  the  case  of  a  member  appointed  under  sub-paragraph   (2)(b), 
      (c)   or  (d)  of  this  Article,   if   his   appointment   is   revoked       by   the 
      Governor-General. 

   (4)   If  the   office  of   a  member   of  the   Commission,  appointed   under 
sub-paragraph  (2)(b),        (c)  or  (d) of  this   Article   is  vacant  or  any  such 
member  is  for any  reason  unable  to  perform  -the functions  of  his  office, 
the  Governor-General  may  appoint  a  person  qualified  for  appointment 
under  the  said  sub-paragraph  (b),  (c)  or  (d),  as  the  case  may  be,  to  act 
in  ,the office  of that member  and  any  person  so  appointed  may  continue 
so  to  act  until  his  appointment  is  revoked. 

   (5)  In  revoking  the  appointment   of  a  member   of  the   Commission 
under   sub-paragraph  (3)(b)   of  'this  Article,  and  in  making  or  revoking 
an  appointment  to  act  in  the  office   of  a  member  of  the  Commission 
under   paragraph       (4)   of   this  Article,  the   Governor-General  shall   act 


                  in  the  same  manner  as  he  would  act  if  he  were  making  an  appointment 
                  to  the  office  of  that  member  under  paragraph  (2)  of  this  Article. 

                     (6)   Any   decision   of  the  Commission   shall   require  the  concurrence 
                  of  not  less  than  three members  of  the  Commission. 

                     (7)  Subject  to   the   provisions   of  paragraph (6)  of this Article,the 
                  Commission   may          act   notwithstanding   a  vacancy  in  its membership, 
                  and  no  proceedings   of  the  Commission   shall  be  invalidated  by   reason 
                  only  that  some  person  not  entitled  to  do  so  has  taken  part  in  them. 

Procedure            70.-(1)  The  Commission  shall  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
for  review       ti                titraso 
of constitu-      tis Article,  at  intervals  of  not  more  than  five  years, review the  number 
encies.          and  boundaries  of the  constituencies  into which  The Bahamas  is  divided 
                 and  shall  submit  to  the  Governor-General   a  single  report  either- 
                    (a)  stating  that in the opinion of the Commission, no change is 
                       required  ;  or 
                    (b)  recommending  certain  changes, 
                 and  the  Governor-General   shall  cause  such  report  to  be  laid  before  the 
                 House  of  Assembly  forthwith. 
                    (2)   In  carrying   out  a   review  for  the  purposes  of  this  Article, the 
                 Commission        shall   be    guided   by the general consideration that the 
                 number  of   voters   entitled  to  vote   for  the  purposes  of  electing every 
                 member   of the   House  of  Assembly shall, so far as is reasonably 
                 practicable,  be  the  same  and  the  need  to  take  account  of  special  con- 
                 siderations  such  as  the  needs   of  sparsely  populated  areas,  the  practic- 
                 ability  of  elected   members  maintaining   contact  with   electors  in   such 
                 areas,    size, physical  features,   natural boundaries and  geographical 
                 isolation. 
                    (3)  When   the   Commission   intends   to  proceed   under  paragraph   (1) 
                 of  this  Article,  it  shall,  by  notice  in writing,  inform the Prime Minister, 
                 who  shall  cause  a  copy  of that  notice  to  be  published  in  the  Gazette. 
                    (4)  As  soon  as  may  be   after  the  Commission  has  submitted  a  report 
                 recommending changes in   the   boundaries of any constituencies, the 
                 Prime  Minister  shall  lay  before  the  House  of Assembly  for  its  approval 
                 a  draft  of  an  Order  by  the  Governor-General   for  giving  effect,  whether 
                with  or  without  modifications,  to  the  recommendations  contained  in  the 
                report,  and  that  draft  may  make  provision  for  any  matters  (including 
                variation      of  the  quorum   specified   in   Article   57 of this Constitution) 
                which  appear  to  the  Prime  Minister  to  be  incidental  to  or  consequential 
                 upon  the other  provisions  of the  draft. 

                    (5)  Where   any  draft  Order   laid  under  this  Article  would  give  effect 
                to  any   such  recommendations   with   modifications, the  Prime  Minister 
                 shall  lay  before  the  House  of  Assembly  together  with  the  draft  a  state- 
                ment  of the  reasons  for the  modifications. 

                    (6)  If  the  motion   for  the   approval  of  any  draft   Order  laid  under 
                this  Article  is  rejected  by  the  House  of  Assembly,   or  is  withdrawn  by 
                leave   of  the  House,   an   amended   draft  shall   be            laid   without   undue 
                delay  by   the  Prime  Minister  before  the  House  of  Assembly. 

                   (7)   If any  draft Order  laid under  -this Article is approved  by resolution 
                of  the  House  of  Assembly,   the  Prime  Minister  shall  submit  it  to  the 
                Governor-General   who  shall  make  an  Order  (which  shall  be  published 
 in  the  Gazette)  in  ,terms  of  the  draft ;  and  that  Order  shall  come  into 
  force  on  such  day  as  may  be  specified  therein  and,  until  revoked  by 
 a  -further  Order   made  -by  the   Governor-General             in   accordance   with 
 the   provisions     of  this   Article,   shall   have   the   force   of  law   in   The 
 Bahamas: 
    Provided   that  the   coming   into   force   of   any   such   Order   shall  not 
 affect  any   election  to   the  House  of  Assembly  until  a  proclamation   is 
 made   by   the     Governor-General        appointing   the   date   for  the  holding 
  of  a  general  election   of  members   of  the  House  of  Assembly   or  affect 
 the  constitution   of  the  House  of  Assembly  then  in  being. 

    (8)  Save  as  provided   in  the  next   following  paragraph  the   question 
 of  the  validity  of  any  Order  by  the  Governor-General  purporting  to  be 
 made   under  this   Article   and   reciting   that   a  draft   -thereof has   been 
  approved  by  resolution  of  the  House  of  Assembly  shall  not  be  inquired 
  into  in  any  court  of  law. 

    (9)  Parliament  may  by  law  provide           for  an   appeal  to  the   Supreme 
 Court  against  a  statement  or  recommendation   submitted  by  the  Corm- - 
 mission  in  pursuance  of  sub-paragraph  (1)(a)  or  (b)  of  this  Article. 

                                     CHAPTER  VI 

                                     THE   EXECUTIVE 

    71.-(1)  The  executive   authority   of  The  Bahamas   is  vested  in  Her   
 Majesty.                                                                                       

    (2)   Subject   to   the   provisions     of  this   Constitution, the executive 
 authority  of  The  Bahamas  may  be  exercised  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty 
 by  the  Governor-General,  either  directly  or  through  officers  subordinate 
 to  him. 
    (3)  Nothing  in  this  Article  shall  prevent  Parliament  from  conferring 
 functions  on  persons   or  authorities  other  than  the  Governor-General. 

    72.--(1)   There  shall  be  a  Cabinet  for  The Bahamas  which  shall  have               
 the  general  direction  and  control  of  the  government   of  The  Bahamas 
 and   shall  be   collectively   responsible   therefor   to  Parliament. 
    (2)  The  Cabinet  shall  consist  of  the  Prime  Minister  and  not  less  than 
 eight  other  Ministers  (of  whom  one  shall  be  the  Attorney-General),   as 
 may  be   appointed  in   accordance   with  the  provisions   of  Article   73   of 
 this  Constitution. 

    73.-(1)  Whenever  there  shall  be  occasion   for  the  appointment  of  a   
 Prime  Minister,  the  Governor-General  shall  appoint  as  Prime  Minister-                  
    (a)  the  member  of  the  House  of  Assembly  who  is  the  leader  of  the 
       party  which  commands  the  support  of  the  majority  of  the  members 
       of that  House,  or 
    (b)  if  it  appears  to  him  that  that  party  does  not  have  an  undisputed 
      leader   in  that  House   or  that  no  party  commands   the  support   of 
       such   a  majority,  the  member  of  the  House  of  Assembly  who,  in 
       his judgment,  is most  likely  to  command  the  support  of the majority 
       of members  of that House, 
and  who  is willing  to accept  the  office  of Prime Minister. 

                     (2)  Subject -to the provisions of paragraph (3) of this Article, the 
                  Ministers  other  than   the  Prime  Min-ister   shall  be   such  persons  as  the 
                  Governor-General,         acting  in  accordance   with   the  advice   of  the  Prime 
                 Minister,     shall   appoint   from   among   the         Senators   and   the   members 
                  of  the I-louse  of Assembly. 

                     (3)  If  tle  Attorney-General is appointed   from  among  the   members 
                  of  the   House   of   Assembly, not  more than   three  Ministers shall be 
                  appointed      from   among  the   Senators,   and   if   the  Attorney-General is 
                  appointed  from  among  the  Senators,  not  more  than  two  other  Ministers 
                  shall  be   appointed   from   among  the  Senators. 
                     (4)  If  occasion    arises   for   making   an   appointment   to  the   office   of 
                 Prime   Minister       while   Parliament       is  dissolved,    a   person   who   was       a 
                 member   of  the  House  of  Assembly  immediately  before  the  dissolution 
                 may,  notwithstanding   any  other  provision   of  this  Article,  be  appointed 
                 as  Prime Minister. 
                    (5)  If  occasion  arises  for  making  an   appointment  to  the  office  of  any 
                 other  Minister  while  Parliament  is  dissolved,  a person   who,  immediately 
                 before  the  dissolution,   was        a  Senator   or  a   member   of  the  House   of 
                 Assembly  may,  subject  to  .the provisions  of paragraph  (3) of this  Article, 
                 be  appointed  as  a  Minister. 

Tenure  of          74.---()    If   the   House   of  Assembly passes a   resolution, supported 
office  of       by   the  votes  of  a  majority  of  all  the  members  of  the  House,  declaring 
Ministers,       that  it  has  no  confidence  in  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Prime  Minister 

                 does  not  within   seven  days  of  the  passing   of  such  a  resolution   either 
                 resign    or   advise    the   Governor-General to dissolve  Parliament, the 
                 Governor-General   shall  revoke  the  appointment  of  the  Prime  Minister. 

                    (2)   The  Prime  Minister  shall  also  vacate  his  office- 
                    (a)  if   at  any  time   between   the   holding   of   a   general   election   and 
                       the  first  sitting  of  the  House  of  Assembly  thereafter  he  is  informed 
                       by  the  Governor-General   that  the  Governor-General   in   pursuance 
                       of  Article  73(1)    of  this  Constitution  is  about  to  re-appoint  him  as 
                       Prime  Minister  or to  appoint  another  person  as  Prime  Minister  ; or 
                    (b)   if  for  any  reason  other  than  a  dissolution  of  Parliament  he  ceases 
                       to  be   a   member   of  the   House  of  Assembly. 

                   (3)  A  Minister  other  than  the  Prime  Minister  shall  vacate  his  office- 
                    (a)  when  any  person  is  appointed  or  re-appointed  as  Prime  Minister  ; 
                   (b)   if  for  any  reason  other  than  a dissolution  of  Parliament  he  ceases 
                       to  be  a  member  of  the  House  from  among  the  members  of  which 
                      he  was appointed  ; or 
                   (c)  if  his  appointment  is  revoked  by  the  Governor-General   aoting  in 
                       accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister. 

                   (4)   If  at  any  time  the  Prime  Minister  is  required  under -the provisions 
                of  paragraphs  (2),   (3) and  (4)  of  Article  49  of  this  Constitution  to  cease 
                to  perform  his   funotions  as  a   member  of  the  House  of  Assembly,  he 
                shall  cease  during  such  time  to  perform  any  of  his  functions  as  Prime 
               Minister. 

                   (5)  If at  any time a Minister  other  than the  Prime  Minister  is  required 
                under   the  provisions   of  paragraphs (3), (4) and (5)  of  Article 43 or 
                paragraphs  (2),  (3)  and  (4)   of  Article  49  of  this  Constitution  to  cease  to 

 perform   his  functions   as  a  member  of  the  House  to  which  he  belongs, 
 he   shall  cease  during   such  time  to  perform   any  of  his  functions  as  a 
 Minister. 

    75.-(1)  Whenever  the  Prime  Minister  is  absent  from  The  Bahamas    
 or  is  unable  by   reason  of  illness  or  of  the  provisions   of  paragraph  (4)                                                                                              
 of  Article   74   of  this  Constitution  to  perform   the  functions  conferred   Minister 
 upon   him   by  this   Constitution,   the   Governor-General   may   authorise  during 
 some  other   member  of  the  Cabinet  to  perform  those  functions  (other  absence, 
 than   the   functions   conferred   by   this  Article)   and  thait   member   may   illness  or 
 perform   those  functions  until  his  authority  is  revoked  by  the  Governor-  suspension. 
 General. 
    (2)  The  powers  of  the  Governor-General   under  this  Article  shall  be 
exercised  by  him  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Prime  Minister: 
    Provided   hat  if  -the Governor-General   considers  that  it  is  impractic- 
able  ,to obtain  the  advice   of  the  Prime  Minister  owing  to  his   absence 
or illness,  or  if  the  Prime  Minister  is  unable  to  tender  advice  by  reason 
of  the  provisions   of  paragraph   (4)   of  Article  74   of  -this Constitution, 
the   Governor-General   may   exercise  those  powers   without   the   advice 
of the  Prime  Minister. 

   76.-(1)  Whenever  a Minister other   than   the  Prime  Minister is   
unable,   by     reason    of  his   illness   or   absence     from   The  Bahamas or   
absence     from   his   duties   on   leave,     to   perform   the   functions       of  his 
office,    the    Governor-General          may,     in   writing,     authorise      another 
 Minister     to   perform    those   functions      or   appoint     a  person   to     be   a 
temporary   Minister: 
   Provided  that  if  occasion  arises   for  the  making   of  an,  appointment 
between      a  dissolution   of   Parliament   and  the  next   following            general 
election,    the  preceding  provisions   of  this  Article   shall   have   effect   for 
the  purpose  as  if  Parliament  had  not  been  dissolved. 

   (2)  Subject  to  the  provisions   of  Article  74   of  'this  Constitution,   a 
temporary  Minister  shall  hold  office until  be  is  notified  by the  Governor- 
General  in  writing  that  the  Minister  on  account  of  whose  inability  to 
perform  the  functions  of  his  office  he  was  appointed  is   again  able  to 
perform  those  functions  or  ,that Minister  vacates  his  office. 

   (3)  The  powers   conferred   on  the  Governor-General by   tlis  Article 
shall  be  exercised  by  him  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  the  Prime 
Minister. 

   77.  The  Governor-General,   acting   in  accordance  with  the  advice   of  Allocation 
the  Prime   Minister,  may,   by         directions   in  writing,   charge  the   Prime  of portfolios 
Minister  or  any  other  Minister  with  responsibility   for  any  business  of   to  Ministers. 
the  Government   of  The  Bahamas,   including  -the administration   of  any 
department  of  Government: 
   Provided      that  a   Minister   appointed   from  among   members   of  the 
House  of  Assembly  shall  be  charged  with  responsibility  for  finance. 

   78.-(1)  The  Attorney-General   shall  have  power  in  any  case  in  which   
he  considers  it  desirable  so  to  do-                                                         
(a)  to  institute  and  undertake  criminal  proceedings  against  any  person 
      before  any  court  in  respect  of  any   offence  against  the  law  of  The 
      Bahamas  ; 

                      (b)  to   take   over   and   con-the  any   such   criminal   proceedings  that 
                         may  have   been  instituted  by    any  other  person   or  authority;  and 
                      (c)  to   discontinue, at   any   stage   before  judgment is  delivered,   any 
                         such   criminal  proceedings instituted or undertaken by himself or 
                         any  other  person  or  authority. 

                      (2)  The  powers   of  the  Attorney-General   under  paragraph   (1)  of  this 
                   Article  may   be   exercised   by  him   in   person   or  through   other  persons 
                   acting  under  and  in  accordance  with  his  general  or  special  instructions. 

                      (3)  The     powers      conferred       upon      tile  Attorney-General by    sub- 
                   paragraphs   (1)  (b)  and  (c)  of  this  Article  shall  be  vested   in   him  to  the 
                   exclusion  of  any  other  person  or authority: 
                     Provided      that,   where      any   other  person  or  authority   has instituted 
                  crimihal   proceedings,         nothing   in   ,this  Article   shall   prevent  the with- 
                  drawal  of  those   proceedings  by or at  the   instance of  that person   or 
                  authority  at  any  stage  before  the  peason   against  whom  the  proceedings 
                  have  been  instituted  has  been  charged  before  the  court. 

                      (4)  In   ithe   exercise  of  powers  conferred  upon  him  by  this  Article  the 
                  Attoniey-General  shall   not be  subject  to   the   direction or  control   of 
                  any  olher  person  or  authority. 

                     (5)  For  the  purposes  of  this  Article,  any  appeal  from  any  determina- 
                  tion  in   any   criminal   proceedings         before  any   court  or  any  case stated 
                  or  question   of  law   reserved   for   the  purpose   of   any   such  ptoceedings 
                  to  any  other  court  shall  be deemed  to  be  part  of those  proceedings. 

Exercise  of         79.-(1)  The  Governor-General shall,  in  the  exercise  of  his  functions, 
Governor-         act  in  accordance   with   the  advice   of  the  Cabinet  or  a  Minister  acting 
General's         under   the  general   authority   of   the  Cabinet,  except   hi   cases  where   by 
                  this   Constitution  or  any  other  law  he  is  required   to  act  in  accordance 
                  with  the   recommendation   or  advice  of,  or  with  the  concurrence   of,  or 
                  after  consultation  with,   any  person  or  authority  other  than  the  Cabinet: 

                     Provided   that  the  Governor-General   shall  act  in  accordance  with  his 
                  own  deliberate judgment  in  ,the performance  of  the  following  functions- 
                     (a)  in   the  exercise  of  'the  power   to   appoint  the  Prime  Minister  con- 
                         ferred   upon   him  by  paragraphs (1)   or  (4)  of   Article 73 of   this 
                        Constitution  I 
                     (b)  in   tile  exercise   of  the  powers  conferred   upon   him  by   Article   75 
                        of    this  Constitution  (which  relates  to   the performance  of   the 
                        functions      of   the   Prime   Minister   during   absence, illness or sus- 
                         pension)     in  the   circumstances  described in   the   proviso to para- 
                        graph  (2) of  that  Article  ; 
                     (c)   in   the  exercise  of  the  power  to  appoint  the  Leader  of  the  Oppo- 
                        sition   and   to    revoke   any   such   appointment   conferred upon   him 
                        by  Article   82  of  this  Constitution  ; 
                     (d)  in  the   exercise  of  the  powers   conferred  on  him   by  Article  83(a) 
                        of   this  Constitution   during  any  vacancy  in  the  office   of  Leader  of 
                        the  Opposition  ; 
                     (e)  in   ie   exercise   of   the   power       to   dissolve    Parliament   conferred 
                        upon  him  by  the  proviso  to  Article  66(2)  of  this  Constitution  ; 
                     (f)  in   removing   a   Justice-of   the   Supreme   Court   from   office   under 
                        Article  96(5)  of  this  Constitution

(g) in removing a Justice of Appeal from office under Article 102(5) of this Constitution ; 

(h) in the powers relating to appointment. removal and disciplinary control over members of his personal 
starr, conferred on him by Article 35 of this Constitution. 

(2) Where the Governor-General is directed to exercise any function on the recommendation of any person or 
authority. he shall exercise that function in accordance with such recommendation: 

Provided that- 

(a) before he acts in accordance therewith. he may. acting in accord ance with his own deliberate judgment. 
once refer that recorn mendataon back for reconsideration by the person or authority concerned; and 

(b) if that person or authority, having reconsidered the original recommendation under sub-paragraph (a) of 
this proviso. substitutes therefor a different recommendation. the provisions of this para graph shall apply 
to that different recommendation as they apply to the original recommendation. 

(3) Where the Governor-General is directed to exercise any function after consultation with any person or 
authority he shall not be obliged to exercise that function in accordance with the advice or recom mendation 
of that person or authority. 

(4) Where the Governor-General is directed to exercise any function on the recommendation or advice of, or 
with the concurrence of, or after consultation with. any person or authority, the question whether he has so 
exercised that function shall not be enquired into in any court. 

(5) Where the Governor-General is directed to exercise any function on the recommendation of the Prime 
Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. the following steps shall be takcn- 

(0) the Prime Minister shall first consult the Leader of the Oppo sition and thereafter tender his 
recommendation to the Governor General; 

(I the Governor-General shall then inform the Leader of the Oppo sition of that recommendation and if the 
Leader of the Opposition concurs therein the Governor-General shall act. in accordance with the recommendation; 

(c) if the Leader of the Opposition does not concur in the recom mendation the Governor-General shall so 
inform the Prime Minister and refer the recommendation back to him; 

(d) the Prime Minister shall then advise the Governor-General and the Governor-General shall act in accordance 
with that advice. 

(6) Any reference in this Constitution to the functions of the Governor-General shall be construed as a 
reference to his powers and duties in the exercise of the executive authority of The Bahamas and to any other 
powers and duties conferred or imposed on him as Governor-General by or under this Constitution or any other 
law. 

Governor General to be informed concerning matters of Government. 

Parliamen tary Secretaries. 

Leader of the Opposition. 

80. The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General fully in fanned concerning the general conduct of the 
government of The Bahamas and shall furnish the Governor-General w~tJh such informa tion as he may request 
with respect to any particular matter relating to the government of The Bahamas. 

81.-(1) The Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. may appoint 
Parliamentary Secretaries from among the Senators and the members of the House of Assembly to assist Ministers 
in the performance of their duties: 

Provided that. if occasion arises for making an appointment while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a 
Senator or a member of the House of Assembly immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as a 
Parliamentary Secretary. 

(2) The office of a Parliamentary Secretary shall become vacant- 

(n) if for any reason other than a dissolution of Parliament he ceases to be a member of the House from among 
the members of which he was appointed; 

(b) upon the appointment or re-appointment of any person as Prime Minister; or 

(c) if the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice 

of the Prime Minister, so directs. I 

82.-(1) There shall be a Leader of the Opposition who shall be appointed by the Governor-General. 

(2) Whenever there shall be occasion for the appointment of a Leader of the Opposition, tile Governor-General 
shall appoint the member of the House of Assembly who, in his judgment, is best able to command the SUppOR of 
the majority of the members of the House in opposition to the Government: or if there is no such person, the 
member of the House who, in his judgment. commands the support of the largest single group of members in 
opposition to the Government who are prepared to support one leader: 

Provided that this paragraph shall have effect in relation to any period between a dissolution of Parliament 
and the day on which the next election of members of ifihe House of Assembly is held as if Parliament had not 
boon dissolved. 

(3) The Leader of the Opposition shall vacate his office if- 

(a) after an election 'Of members 'Of the House of Assembly following any dissolution of Parliament he is 
informed by the Govemor General ilha.t the Governor-General is about Ito appoint another 

person as Leader 'Of the Opposition ; - - 

(b) for any reason other than a dissolution of Parliament he ceases to be a member of the House of Assembly; 

(c) under the provisions of paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of Article 49 of this Constitution he is required to 
cease to perform his func tions as a member of the House of Assembly; or 

(d) his appointment is revoked under the provisions of paragraph (4) of thls Article. 

(4) If in the judgment of the Governor-General the Leader of the Opposition is no longer the member of the 
House of Assembly best 

able to command the support of the majority of members of the House tin opposition to the Government or the 
member of the House who commands the support of the largest single group of members in opposition to the 
Government who are prepared to support one leader. the Governor-General shall revoke the appointment of the 
Leader of the Opposition. 

(5) Paragraph (4) of this Article shall not have effect while Parliament is dissolved. 

83. During any period in which there is a vacancy in the office of Leader of the Opposition by reason of the 
fact that no person is both qualified in accordance with this Constitution for. and willing to accept 
appointment to, that office, the Governor-General shall- 

(a) act in accordance with his own deliberate judgment in the exer cise of any function in respect of which 
it lis provided in this Constitution that the Governor-General shall act in accordance with the advice of the 
Leader of the Opposition; and 

(b) aot on the recommendation of the Prime Minister in the exercise of any function in respect of which i,t is 
provided in this Constitu tion that the Governor-General shall act on the recorumendation of tho Prime 
Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

84. A Minister or Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the Oaths to be duties of his office unless he 
has taken and subscribed the oath of ~~er\by allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as 
may be et~~IS ers, prescribed by Parliament. 

Certain 

vacancies in office of Leader of the Opposition. 

85. The Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of Leave of the Prime Minister, may grant leave 
of absence from his duties to any ~i~~~~r~~r 

Minister or Parliamentary Secretary. etc. 

86.-(1) The Cabinet shall not be summoned except by the authority Summoning 

of the Prime Minister. of and presiding 

(2) The Prime Minister shall. so far as is practicable. attend and in Cabinet. preside at all meetings of the 
Cabinet and in his 'absence such other 

Minister shall preside as the Prime Minister shall appoint. 

87.-(1) No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the Cabinet Quorum. if there are presenrt at 111e 
meeting less than a majority of the members 

for the. time being of the Cabinet. 

(2) Subject to paragraph (1) of this Article, the Cabinet shall not be disqualified for the transaction of 
business by reason of any vacancy in the membership of the Cabinet (including any vacancy not filled when the 
Cabinet is first constituted or is reconstituted at any time) and the validity of the transaction of business 
in -the Cabinet shall not be affected by reason only of the fact that some person who was not entitled so to 
do took part in those proceedings. 

88. Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any Permanent department of Government. he 
shall exercise general direction and Secretaries. control over that departrncnt ; and, subjeot Ito such 
direction and 

control. the department shall be under tile supervision of a public 

officer (in this Constitution referred to as a Permanent Secretary) 

appointed for the purpose: 

Constitution of offices. etc. 

Powers of pardon, etc. 

Advisory Committee on Pre rogative of Mercy. 

Functions of Advisory Committee. 

Provided that two or more Government departments may be placed under the supervision of one Permanent 
Secretary. 

89. Subject ,to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, the Governor-General may 
constitute offices for The Bahamas. make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment. 

90.-{1) The Governor-General may. in Her Majesty's name and on Her Majesty's behalf- 

(a) grant to any person convicted of any offence against the law of The Bahamas a pardon, either free or 
subject 10 lawful conditions; 

(b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period. from the execution of any 
punishment imposed on that person for such an offence ; 

(c) substitute a less severe fonn of punishment for that imposed by any sentence for such an offence; or 

(d) remit <the whole or any pant of any sentence passed for such an offence or any penalty or forfeiture 
otherwise due ro Her Majesty on account 'Of such an offence. 

(2) The powers of the Governor-General under paragraph (1) of this Article shall be exercised by him in 
accordance with the advice of a Minister designated by him, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime 
Minister. 

91. There shall be an Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy which shall consist of- 

(a) the Minister referred to in paragraph (2) of Article 90 of this Constitution. who shall be Chairman; 

(b) the Attorney-General; and 

(c) not less than three or more than five other members appointed by the Governor-General. 

92.-(1) Where an offender has been sentenced to death by any court for an offence against the law of The 
Bahamas. the Minister shall cause a written report of the case from the trial Justice of the Supreme Court 
together with such other information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as the Minister may 
require, to be taken into consideration at a meeting of the Advisory Committee: 

(2) The Minister may consult with the Advisory Committee before tendering any advice to the Governor-General 
under paragraph (2) of Article 90 of this Constitution in any case not falling within paragraph (1) of this 
Article. 

(3) The Minister shall not be obliged in any case to act in accordance with the advice of the Advisory 
Committee. 

(4) The Advisory Committee may regulate its own procedure. 

(5) In this Article " the Minister It means the Minister referred to in paragraph (2) of Article 90 of this 
Constitution. 


CHAPTER VII 

THE JUDICATURll 

PART I 

The Supreme Court 

93.-(1) There shall be a Supreme Court for The Bahamas which Establish shall have such jurisdiction and 
powers as may be conferred upon it St~;:e~e 

by this Constitution or any other law. Court. 

(2) The Justices of the Supreme Court shall be the Chief Justice 

and such number of other Justices as may be prescribed by Parliament. 

(3) No office of Justice of the Supreme Court shall be abolished 

while there is a substantive holder thereof. 

(4) The Supreme Court shall be a superior court of record and. save as otherwise provided by Parliament. shall 
have all the powers of such a court. 

94.-(1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the Governor General by instrument under the Public Seal on 
the recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(2) The other Justices of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the Governor-General by instrument under the 
Public Seal acting on the advice of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission. 

(3) The qualifications for appointment as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall be such as may be prescribed by 
any law for the time being in force: 

Provided that a person who has been appointed as a Justice of the Supreme Court may continue in office 
notwithstanding any subsequent variations in the qualifications so prescribed. 

9S.-(1) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant or if the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform 
the functions of his office. then. until a person has been appointed to that office and assumed its functions 
or. as the case may be, until the Chief Justice has resumed those functions. they shall be performed by such 
other person, qualified under paragraph (3) of Article 94 of this Constitution for appointment as a Justice, 
as the Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister may appoint for that 
purpose by instrument under the Public Seal. 

(2) If the office of a Justice of the Supreme Court is vacant. or if any such Justice is appointed to act as 
Chief Justice or as a Justice of Appeal. or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, 
the Governor-General, acting on the advice of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission. may by instrument 
under the Public Seal appoint a person qualified under paragraph (3) of Article 94 of this Constitution for 
appointment as a Justice to act as a Justice of the Supreme Court. and any person so appointed shall, subject 
to the provisions of paragraph (5) of Article 96 of this Constitution. continue 

Appointment of Justices 

of Supreme Court. 

Acting Justices. 

59 

Tenure of office of Justices of Supreme Court. 

to act for the period of his appointment or. if no such period is specified. until his appointment is revoked 
by the Governor-General acting on the advice of the J udicial and Legal Service Commission. 

(3) Any person appointed to act as a Justice under the provisions of this Article may. notwithstanding that 
the period of his appointment has expired or his appointment has been revoked. sit as a Justice for the 
purpose of delivering judgment or doing any other thing in relation to proceedings which were commenced before 
him while he was so acting. 

96.-(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (4) to (7) (inclusive) of this Article. a Justice of the 
Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years: 

Provided that the Governor-General. acting on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with 
the Leader of the Opposition. may permit a Justice who attains the age of sixty-five years to continue in 
office until be has attained such later age. not exceeding sixty-seven years. as may (before the Justice has 
attained the age of sixty-five years) have 'been agreed between them. 

(2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at which he is required by or Under the provisions of this 
Article to vacate his office. a person holding the office of Justice of the Supreme Court may. with the 
permission of the Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, continue in 
office for such period after attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to 
do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age. 

(3) Nothing done by a Justice of the Supreme Court shall be invalid by reason only that he has attained the 
age at which he is required by this Article to vacate his office. 

(4) A Justice of the Supreme Court may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of 
his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. and shall 
not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (5) of this Article. 

(5) A Justice of the Supreme Court shall be removed from office by the Governor-General by instrument under 
the Public Seal if the question of the removal of that Justice from office has, at the request of the 
Governor-General. made in pursuance of paragraph (6) of this Article. been referred by Her Majesty to the 
Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council and the Judicial Committee has advised Her Majesty that the 
Justice ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour, 

(6) If the Prime Minister (in the case of the Chief Justice) or the Chief Justice after consultation with the 
Prime Minister (in the case of any other Justice) represents to the Governor-General that the question of 
removing a Justice of the Supreme Court from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour ought to be 
investigated. then- 

(a) the G~vemor-General shall appoint a tribunal. which shall con sist of a Chairman and not less than two 
other members. selected by the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of 


the Prime Minister (in the case of the Chief Justice) or of the Chief Justice (in the case of any other 
Justice) from among persons who hold or have held high judicial office; 

(b) that tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
recommend to the Governor-General whether he should request that the question of the removal of that Justice 
should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee; and 

(c) if the tribunal so recommends. the Governor-General shall request that the question should be referred 
accordingly. 

(7) The provisions of the Commissions of Inquiry Acua) as in force immediately before the appointed day shall.
 subject to the provisions of this Article. apply as nearly as may be in relation to tribunals appointed under 
paragraph (6) of this Article or. as the context may require, to the members thereof as they apply in relation 
to the Com missions or Commissioners appointed under that Act, and for that purpose shall have effect as if 
they formed part of this Constitution. 

(8) If the question of removing a Justice of the Supreme Court from office bas been referred to a tribunal 
appointed under paragraph (6) of this Article, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of 
the Prime Minister (lin the case of the Chief Justice) or of the Chief Justice after the Chief Justice has 
consulted with the Prime Minister (in the case of any other Justice). may suspend the Justice from performing 
the functions of his office. 

(9) Any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor General, acting in accordance with the 
advice of the Prime Minister or the Chief Justice (as the case may be), and shall in any case cease to have 
effect- 

(a) if the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General that he should not request that the question of the 
removal of the Justice from office should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee: or 

(b) the Judicial Committee advises Her Majesty that the Justice ought not to be removed from office. 

(10) The provisions of this Article shall be without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (2) of Article 
95 of this Constitution. 

97. A Justice of the Supreme Court shall not enter upon tile duties of his offioe unless he has taken and 
subscribed the oath of allegiance and a judicial oath in such fonn as is prescribed by any law in force in The 
Bahamas. 

Oaths to be taken by 

Justices of Supreme Court. 

PART 2 

Court of Appeal 

98.-(1) There shall be a Court of Appeal for The Bahamas which Establish shall have such jurisdiction and 
powers as may be conferred upon it  

(a) Statute Law or the Bahama Islands, Revised Edition 1965. Cap. 180. 



Justices of the Court of Appeal. 

Other arrangements for appeals. 

(2) The Justices of Appeal of the Court of Appeal shall be (a) a President; 

(b) the Chief Justice by virtue of his office as head of the Judiciary but who, however. shall not sit in the 
Court of Appeal. unless he has been invited so to sit by the President of the Court; and 

(c) such number of other Justices of Appeal as may be prescribed by Parliament. 

(3) No office of Justice of Appeal shall be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof. 

(4) The Court of Appeal shall be a superior oourt of record and. save as otherwise provided by Parliament. 
shall have all.the powers of such a court. 

99.-(1) The President of the Court of Appeal and other Justices of Appeal shall be appointed by the 
Governor-General by instrument under the Public Seal on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after 
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(2) The qualifications for appointment as a Justice of Appeal shall be such as may be prescribed. by any law 
for the time being in force: 

Provided that- 

(i) a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Justice of Appeal unless he holds or bas held high 
judicial office; and 

(ii) a person who has been appointed as a Justice of Appeal may continue in office notwithstanding any 
subsequent variations in the qualifications so prescribed. 

100.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part of this Chapter. Parliament may make provision- 

(a) for implementing arrangements made between the Government of The Bahamas and the Government or Governments 
of any other part or parts of the Commonwealth relating to the establishment of a court of appeal to be shared 
by The Bahamas with that part or those parts of the Commonwealth. and for the hearing and determination by 
such a court of appeal of appeals from decisions of any court in The Bahamas; or 

(b) for the hearing and determination of appeals from decisions of any court in The Bahamas by a court 
established for any other part of the Commonwealth. 

(2) A law enacted in pursuance of paragraph (1) of this Article may provide that the jurisdiction conferred on
any such court as is referred to in that paragraph shall be to the exclusion. in whole or in part, of the 
jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal established by this Part of this Chapter; and during any period when 
jurisdiction is so conferred to the exclusion of the Whole jurisdiction of the said Court of Appeal. Parliament
may suspend the provisions of this Part establishing that Court. 

(3) In paragraph (1) of this Article the expression" any court in The Bahamas" includes the Court of Appeal 
established by this Part of this Chapter. 

101.-(1) If the office of President of the Court of Appeal is vacant or if the President of the Court of Appeal 
is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to 
that office and assumed its functions or, as the case may be. until the President of the Court of Appeal has 
resumed those functions. they shall be performed by such other person. qualified under paragraph (2) of Article 
99 of this Constitution for appointment as a Justice of Appeal, as the Governor-General, acting in accordance 
with the advice of the Prime Minister, may appoint for that purpose by instrument under the Public Seal. 

(2) If the office of a Justice of Appeal (other than the President) is vacant, or if any such Justice is 
appointed to act as President of the Court of Appeal, or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of 
his office, the Governor-General, acting on the advice of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission. may by 
instrument under the Public Seal appoint a person qualified under paragraph (2) of Article 99 of this 
Constitution for appointment as a Justice of Appeal to act as a Justice of Appeal, and any person so appointed 
shall, subject to the provisions of paragraph (5) of Article 102 of this Constitution. continue to act for the 
period of his appointment or. if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the 
Governor-General acting on the advice of the Judicial and Legal Service ; Commission. 

(3) Any person appointed to act as a Justice of Appeal under the provisions of this Article may, 
notwithstanding that the period of his appointment has expired or his appointment has been revoked, sit as a 
Justice for the purpose of delivering judgment or doing any other thing in relation to proceedings which were 
commenced before him while he was so acting. 

102.-(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) to (7) (inclusive) of this Article, a Justice of Appeal 
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-eight years: 

Provided that the Governor-General. acting on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with 
the Leader of the Opposi tion. may permit a Justice of Appeal who attains the age of sixty-eight years to 
continue in office until he has attained such later age, not exceeding seventy years, as may (before the 
Justice of Appeal has attained the age of sixty-eight years) have been agreed between them. 

(2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at which he is required by or under the provisions of this 
Article to vacate his office, a person holding the office of Justice of Appeal may, with the permission of the 
Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. continue in office for such 
period after attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing 
in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age. 

(3) Nothing done by a Justice of Appeal shall be invalid by reason only that he has attained the age at which 
he is required by this Article to vacate his office. 

(4) A Justice of Appeal may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of his office 
(whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so 
removed except in accordance with the provisions of para graph (5) of this Article. 

(5) A Justice of Appeal shall be removed from office by the Governor General by instrument under the Public 
Seal if the question of the removal of that Justice of Appeal from office has, at the request of the 
Governor-General made in pursuance of paragraph (6) of this Article, been referred by Her Majesty to the 
Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council and the Judicial Committee has advised Her Majesty that the 
Justice of Appeal ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour. 

(6) If the Prime Minister (in the case of the President of the Court of Appeal) or the President of the Court 
of Appeal or the Chief Justice after consultation with the Prime Minister (in the case of any other Justice of 
Appeal) represents to the Governor-General that the question of removing a Justice of Appeal from office for 
inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour ought to be investigated, then- 

(0) the Governor-General shall appoint a tribunal, which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two 
other members, selected by the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister (in 
the case of the President of the Court of Appeal) or of the President of the Court of Appeal (in the case of 
any other Justice of Appeal) from among persons who hold or have held high judicial office; 

(b) that tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
recommend to the Governor General whether he should request that the question of the removal of that Justice 
of Appeal should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee; and 

(c) if the tribunal so recommends. the Governor-General shall request that the question should be referred 
accordingly. 

{7) The provisions of the Commissions of Inquiry Act(a) as in force immediately before the appointed day 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Article, apply as nearly as may be in relation to tribunals appointed 
under paragraph (6) of this Article or, as the context may require, to the members thereof as they apply in 
relation to Commissions or Com missioners appointed under that Act, and for that purpose shall have effect as 
if they formed part of this Constitution. 

(8) If the question of removing a Justice of Appeal from office has been referred to a tribunal appointed under 
paragraph -(6) of this Article, the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister 
(in the case of the President of the Court of Appeal) or of the President of the Court of Appeal after the 
President of the Court of Appeal has consulted with the Prime Minister (in the case of any other Justice of 
Appeal), may suspend the Justice of Appeal from performing the functions of his office. 

(9) Any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor General. acting in accordance with the 
advice of the Prime Minister or the President of the Court of Appeal (as the case may be), and shall in any 
case cease to have effect if- 

(a) Statute Law of the Bahama Islands, Revised Editioo 1965, Cap. 180. 64 the tribunal recommends to the 
Governor-General that he should not request that the question of the removal of the Justice of Appeal from 
office should be referred by Her Majesty to the J udicial Committee; or 

(b) the Judicial Committee advises Her Majesty that the Justice of Appeal ought not to be removed from office. 

(10) The provisions of this Article shall be without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (2) of Article 
101 of this Constitution. 

(11) The provisions of this Article and of Article 103 of this Con stitution shall not apply to the Chief 
Justice. 

103. A Justice of Appeal shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the 
oath of allegiance and a judicial oath in such form as is prescribed by any law in force in The Bahamas. 

PART 3 

Appeals to Court of Appeal and Her Majesty in COl/neil 

104.-(1) An appeal to the Court of Appeal shall lie as of right from final decisions of the Supreme Court given 
in exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court by Article 28 of this Constitution (which 
relates to the enforcement of fundamental rights and freedoms), 

(2) An appeal shall lie as of right to the Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Councilor to such other 
court as may be prescribed by Parliament under Article 105(3) of this Constitution from any decision given by 
the Court of Appeal in any such case. 

105.-(1) Parliament may provide for an appeal 10 lie from decisions of the Court of Appeal established by Part 
2 of bhis Chapter to the Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Councilor to such other court as may be 
prescribed by Parliament under this Article, either as of right or with the leave of the said Court of Appeal, 
in such cases other than those referred to in Article 104(2) of this Constitution as may be prescribed by 
Parliament. 

(2) Nothing in this Constitution shall affect any right of Her Majesty to grant special leave to appeal from 
decisions such as are referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article. 

(3) Parliament may by law provide for the functions required in this Chapter to be exercised by the Judicial 
Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council to be exercised by any other court established for the purpose in 
substitution for the Judicial Committee. 

106. References in this Part to "the Court of Appeal" include references to a shared court of appeal 
established under Article LOO(l) of this Constitution when exercising jurisdiction in respect of The Bahamas. 
Oaths to be taken by Justices of Appeal. 

Appeals relating to fundamental rights and freedoms. 

Appeals to Her Majesty in Council 

in other cases. 

Interpreta tion of 

 Court of Appeal". 

65 

Establish ment and composition of Public Service Commission. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE PUBLIC SERVICE 

PART 1 

The Public Service Commission 

107.-(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for The Bahamas which shall consist of a Chairman and not 
less than two nor more than four other members, who shall be appointed by the Governor General, acting on the 
recommendation of the Prime Minister aiter consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, by instrument under 
the Public Seal. 

(2) No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Public Service Commission if he is a member 
of either House or a public oflicer. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of Article 126 of this Constitution the office of a member of the Public Service 
Commission shall become vacant- 

(a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his appointment or such earlier time as may be specified 
in the instrument by which he was appointed; 

(b) if he becomes a member of either House or a public officer. 

(4) If the oflice of Chairman of the Public Service Commission is vacant or the holder thereof is for any 
reason unable to perform the functions of his office then, until a person bas been appointed to and has assumed 
the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case 
may be, they shall be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as may for the time being 
be designated in that behalf by the Governor General, acting on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after 
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(5) If the office of a member of the Public Service Commission other than the Chairman is vacant or the holder 
thereof is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the Governor-General, acting on the 
recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a person 
who is qualified for appointment as a. member of the Commission to act in the office of that member: and any 
person so appointed shall.. subject- to the provisions of sub- paragraph (3)(b) of this Article and Article 126
of this Constitution, continue so to act until a person has been appointed to the office in which he is acting 
and has assumed the functions thereof or, as the case may be, the holder thereof resumes those functions or 
until his appointment so to act is revoked by the Governor-General, acting as aforesaid. 

(6) A former member of the Public Service Commission shall not, within a period of five years commencing with 
the date on which he last held or acted in that office, be eligible for appointment to any office power to make
appointments to which is vested by tills Constitu tion in the Governor-General acting on the recommendation or
in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission. 


PART 2 

Appointments etc. of Public Officers 

108. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution power to make appointments to public offices and to 'remove
and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices is hereby vested in the 
Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission. 

109.-{I) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding Article of this Chapter- 

(a) power to make appointments to the office of Permanent Secretary or Head of a Department of Government (or 
to be the holder of any such other office of similar status as the Governor-General may. acting in accordance 
with the advice of the Prime Minister. specify by notice in the Gazette) is hereby vested. in the 
GovernorGeneral acting on the recommendation of the Public Service Com mission after the Commission has 
consulted the Prime Minister; 

(b) power to make appointments to the office of Permanent Secre tary on transfer from another such office 
carrying the same salary is hereby vested in the Governor-General acting on the advice of the Prime Minister. 

(2) In this Article "Permanent Secretary" includes the Secretary of the Cabinet and the Financial Secretary. 

110. The Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission. may by 
directions given by instrument under the Public Seal delegate, to such extent and subject to such conditions 
as may be specified in those directions. the powers vested in him by Article 108 of this Constitution (other 
than powers to make appointments to the offices referred to in Article 109 of this Constitu tion and to remove
or exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices) to such public officers as may
be so specified. 

111.-(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the offices to which this Article applies (including power 
to make appointments on promotion and transfer and to confirm appointments) and to remove persons so appointed 
from any such office shall vest in the Governor General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime 
Minister. 

(2) Defore tendering any advice for the purposes of this Article in relation to any person who holds or acts in
any public office other than an office to which this Article applies. the Prime Minister shall consult the 
Service Commission which is responsible for advising in respect of appointments to the office which the person 
concerned holds or in which he is acting. 

(3) The offices to which this Article applies are the offices of Ambas sador. High Commissioner or any other 
principal representative of The Bahamas in any other country or aocredited to any international organisation. 

112.-(1) Power to make appointments on transfer to the offices to which this Article applies shall vest in the 
Prime Minister. 

(2) The offices to which this Article applies are- 

(a) offices. the holders of which are required to reside outside The Bahamas for the proper discharge of their 
functions; 

Appointments, etc. of public officers. 

Appointments of Permanent Secretaries and certain other public officers. 

Delegation of Governor General's powers. 

Appointments, etc. of principal representatives of 

The Bahamas abroad. 

Appoint ments on transfer in respect of certain offices. 

67 

(b) such offices in the Ministry responsible for the conduct of the external affairs of The Bahamas as may, 
from time to time, be designated by the Prime Minister. 

Appointment of Secretary to the Cabinet. 

113.-(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet whose office shall be a public office. 

(2) Power to appoint any person to the office of Secretary to the Cabinet and to remove such person from that 
office shall vest in the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 

(3) Before tendering advice for the purposes of this Article. the Prime Minister shall consult the Public 
Service Commission. 

(4) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall have charge of the Cabinet Office and shall be responsible, in 
accordance with such instructions as may be given to him by the Prime Minister. for tile supervision of any 
department of the Government for which the Prime Minister has responsibility. 

Public Service Hoard of Appeal. 

PART 3 

The Public Service Board of Appeal 

114.-(1) There shall be a Public Service Board of Appeal for The Bahamas which shall consist of the following 
members. who shall be appointed by instrument under the Public Seal- 

(a) one member appointed by the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of tile Chief Justice 
from among persons who hold or have held high judicial office or are qualified to hold high judicial office, 
who shal1 be Chairman; 

(b) one member appointed by the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister; 
and 

(c) one member appointed by the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the appropriate 
representative body. 

(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Board if he is a member of either House. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Article and of Article 126 of this 

Constitution, the office of a member of the Board shall become vacant (a) at the expiration of three years 
from the date of his appointment; (b) if he becomes a member of either House. 

(4) If at any time any member of the Board is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office, 
the Governor-General may appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed as a member of the Board to act as 
a member. and any person so appointed shall. subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (3)(b) of this Article 
and Article 126 of this Constitution, continue to act until the office in which he is acting has been filled 
Of. as the case may be. until the holder thereof has resumed his functions or until his appointment to act has 
been revoked by the Governor-General. 

(5) The B~d shall. in the exercise of its functions under this Con stitution. not be subject to the direction 
or control of any other person or authority, 

(6) In this Article " the appropriate representative body" means such body representing the interests of 
public officers as the Governor General may, by Order, designate. 

115.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, an appeal shall lie to the Public Service Board of Appeal 
at the instance of the officer in respect of whom the decision is made from any decision of the 
Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission, that ally public 
officer shall be removed from office or that any penalty should be imposed on him by way of disciplinary 
control. 

(2) Upon an appeal under paragraph (1) of this Article the Board may affirm or set aside the decision appealed
from or may make any other decision which the authority or person from Whom the appeal 

(3) Every decision of the Board shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members. 

(4) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (3) of this Article, the 

Board may by regulations make provision for (a) the procedure of the Board: 

(b) the procedure in appeals under this Article: 

(c) excepting from the provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article decisions in respect of public officers 
holding otlices whose emolu ments do not exceed such sum as may be prescribed or such decisions to exercise 
disciplinary control, other than decisions to remove from office, as may be prescribed. 

(5) Regulations made under this Article may, with the consent of the Prime Minister, confer powers or impose 
duties on any public officer or any authority of the Government of The Bahamas for the purpose of the exercise 
of the functions of the Board. 

(6) The Board may, subject to the provisions of this Article and to its rules of procedure. act notwithstanding
any vacancy in its member ship or the absence of any member. 

PART 4 

Appeals ill discipline cases. 

The Judicial and Legal Service Commission 

116.-(1) There shall be a Judicial and Legal Service Commission Establish- 

for The Bahamas. ment and composition 

of the judicial and Legal 

Service Commission. 

(2) The members of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission shall be- 

(a) the Chief Justice. who shall be Chairman: 

(b) such other Justice of the Supreme Court or Justice of Appeal as may be designated by the Governor-General
acting on the recom mendation of the Chief Justice, by instrument under the Public Seal : 

(e) the Chairman of the Public Service Commission; and 

Cd) two persons appointed by the Governor-General by instrument under the Public Seal. acting on the 
recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

Appoint. ments, etc. of judicial and legal officers. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of Article 126 of this Constitution, the office of a member of the Judicial and 
Legal Service Commission referred to in sub-paragraph (2)(d) of this Article shall become vacant- 

(a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his appointment or such earlier time as may be specified 
ion the instrument by which he was appointed; 

(b) if he becomes a member of either House. 

(4) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Commission under subparagraph (2)(d) of 
this Article unless he holds or is qualified to hold or has held high judicial office; and a person shall be 
disqualified for appointment as such if he is a member of either House. 

(5) If the office of Chairman of the Judicial and Legal Service Com mission is vacant or the holder thereof is
for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and 
has assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, 
as the case may be, they shall be performed by such one of the other mem bers of the Commission as may for 
the time being be designated in that behalf by the Governor-General, acting on the recommendation of the Chief 
Justice, or, if he is for any reason incapacitated from making a recommendation, of the other Justice of the 
Supreme Court or Justice of Appeal who is a member of the Commission. 

(6) If at any time one of the members of the Commission referred to in sub-paragraphs (2)Cb). (c) or Cd) of 
this Article is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office, the Governor-General. in the 
case of the Chairman of the Public Service Commission. may appoint another member of the Public Service 
Commission to act as a member, and in the case of a member referred to in sub-para graphs (2)(b) or (d) of 
this Article may, acting on the same recommen dation as for the appointment of that member, appoint a person 
who is qualified to be appointed as a member of the Commission to act as a member. Any person so appointed 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (3)(b) of this Article and Article 126 of this Constitution, 
continue to act until the office in which he is acting has been filled or, as the case may be, until the holder
thereof has resumed his functions or until his appointment to act has been revoked bytbe Governor General, 
acting as aforesaid. 

117.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, power to make appointments to public offices to which 
this Article applies and to remove and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such 
offices is hereby vested in the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial and Legal
Service Commission. 

(2) This Article applies to such public offices for appointment to which persons are required to possess legal 
qualifications as may be prescribed by Parliament. 

PART 5 

The Police Service Commission 

118.-(1) There shall be a Police Service Commission for the Bahamas which shall consist of a Chairman and two 
other members appointed by the Governor-General acting on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after 
consultation with the Len-der of the Opposition, by instrument under the Public Seal. 

(2) No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Police Service Commission if he is a member
of either House or a public officer. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of Article 126 of this Constitution. the office of a member of the Police Service
Commission shall become vacant- 

(a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his appointment or at such earlier time as may be 
specified in the instrument by which he was appointed: 

(b) if he becomes a member of either House or a public officer. 

(4) If the office of Chairman of the Police Service Commission is vacant or the holder thereof is for any 
reason unable to perform the __ functions of his office. then. until a person has been appointed to and has 
assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions. as 
the case may be. they shall be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as may for the 
time being be designated in that behalf by the Governor General, acting on the recommendation of the Prime 
Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, 

(5) ]f the office of a member of the Police Service Commission other than the Chairman is vacant or the holder 
thereof is for any reason unable to perform the functions thereof. the Governor-General. acting on the 
recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. may appoint a person
who is qualified for appointment as a member of the Commission to act in the office of that member; and any 
person so appointed shall, subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (3)(b) of this Article and Article 126 of
this Constitution. continue so to act until a person has been appointed to the office in which he is acting and
has assumed the functions thereof or, as the case may be. the holder thereof resumes those func tions or until
his appointment so to act is revoked by the Governor General. acting as aforesaid. 

119.-(1) Power to make appointments to the offices of Commis sioner of Police and Deputy Commissioner of 
Police shall be vested in the Governor-General acting on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after 
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(2) Save as provided under paragraph (I) of this Article power to make appointments to offices in the Police 
Force of or above the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police is vested in the Governor-General acting on the 
recommendation of the Prime Minister after consultation with the Police Service Commission. 

Removal of the Com missioner and Deputy Commis sioner of Police. 

Removal and discipline of members of the Force. 

(3) Save as provided in the preceding paragraphs of this Article, power to make appointments to offices in the 
Police Force of or above the rank of Inspector is vested in the Governor-General. acting on the advice of the 
Police Service Commission. 

(4) There shall be in the Police Force such number of Police Pro motion Boards. each consisting of officers in
the Police Force above the rank: of Inspector. as may be prescribed by regulations made under this paragraph. 

(5) Power to make appointments to offices in the Police Force below the rank of Inspector shall be vested in 
the Commissioner of Police acting after consultation with a Police Promotion Board. 

(6) Power to make postings and appointments on transfer within the Police Force of officers in that Force shall
be vested in the Com missioner of Police. 

120.-(1) The Commissioner of Police and Deputy Commissioner of Police may be removed from office by the 
Governor-General but shall not be removed except in accordance with the provisions of para graph (2) of this 
Article. 

(2) The Commissioner of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police shall be removed from office by the 
Governor-General if the question of his removal from office has been referred to a tribunal appointed under 
paragraph (3) of this Article and the tribunal has recommended to the Governor-General that he ought to be 
removed from office. 

(3) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor-General that the question of removing the Commissioner of 
Police or Deputy Com missioner of Police from office ought to be investigated. then- 

(a) the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister shall suspend the 
Commissioner of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police from performing the functions of his office. as the 
case may be : 

(b) the Governor-General shall appoint a tribunal. which shall con sist of a chairman and not less than two 
other members. selected by the Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial and Legal
Service Commission. from among persons who hold or have held or are eligible to hold high judicial office : and 

(c) the tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General whether 
the Commissioner of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police ought to be removed from office. 

(4) If the question of removing the Commissioner of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police from office has 
been referred to a tribunal under paragraph (3) of this Article, the Governor-General shall revoke any such 
suspension if the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General that the Commissioner of Police or Deputy 
Commissioner of Police should not be removed from office. 

121.-(1) Save as provided under Article 120 of this Constitution. power to remove and to exercise disciplinary 
control over persons holding or acting in the offices of or above the rank of Assistant 

Commissioner in the Police Force is vested in the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the 
Police Service Commission after consultation with the Prime Minister. 

(2) Save as provided in Article 120 of this Constitution and para grapfis (I) and (3) of this Article. power 
to remove and exercise dis ciplinary control over persons holding or acting in offices in the Police Force is 
vested in the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Police Service Commission ." 

(3) The following powers are vested in the Commissioner of Police (a) in respect of officers of or above the 
rank of Assistant Super intendent. the power to administer reprimands ; 

(b) in respect of Inspeotors. the power to exercise disciplinary control 

other than removal or reduction in rank; and . 

(c) in respect of officers below the rank of Inspector. the power to exercise disciplinary control including 
the power of removal. 

(4) The Commissioner of Police may. by directions in writing. and subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, 
delegate to any officer of the Police Force of or above the rank of Inspector any of his powers under 
sub-paragraph (3)(c) of this Article other than the power of removal; but an appeal from any award of 
punishment by such officer shall lie to the Commissioner. 

(5) Parliament may by law provide that an appeal shalt lie to the Governor-General fro III a decision of the 
Commissioner of Police to remove or exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in offices in 
the Police Force in such cases as may be prescribed by such law. and in determining any such appeal the 
Governor-General shall act in accordance with the advice of the Police Service Commission. 

PART 6 

Pensions 

122.-(1) Subject to the provisions of Articles 123 and 124 of this Protection Constitution, the law applicable 
to the grant and payment to any officer. of pension or to his widow, children, dependants or personal 
representatives. of rights. any pension, compensation, gratuity or other like allowance (in this 

Article and Articles 123 and 124 of this Constitution referred to as 

an "award ") in respect of the service of that officer in a public office 

shall be that in force on the relevant date or any later law that is not 

less favourable to that person. 

(2) In paragraph (1) of this Article" the relevant date" means- 

(a) in relation to an award granted before 10th July 1973, the date on which the award was granted; 

(b) in relation to an award granted or to be granted on or after 10th July 1973 to or in respect of any person 
who was a public officer before that date. 9th July 1973 ; 

(e) in relation to an award granted or to be granted to o.r in respect of any person who becomes a public 
officer on or after 10th July 1973, the date on which he becomes a public officer. 

Grant and withholding or pensions, etc. 

(3) Where a person is entitled to exercise an option as to. which of two. or more laws shall apply in his case.
the law specified by him in exercising the option shaH. for the purposes of this Article. be deemed to. be 
more favourable to him than the other law Dr laws. 

(4) Awards granted under any law in respect of service in a public office (not being awards that are a charge 
upon some other public fund of The Bahamas) are hereby oharged on the Consolidated Fund. 

(5) For the purposes of this Article and of Articles 123 and 124 of this Constitution, service as a Justice of 
the Supreme Court or Justice of Appeal shall be deemed to. be service in the public service. 

123.-(1) The power to grant any award under any pensions law for the time being in force in The Bahamas (other 
than an award to which, under that law, the person to whom it is payable is entitled as of right) and. in 
accordance with any provisions in that behalf contained in any such law. to withhold, reduce in amount or 
suspend any award payable under any such law is hereby vested in the Governor-General, 

(2) The power vested in the Governor-General by paragraph (1) of this Article shall be exercised by him on the 
recommendation of the appropriate Service Commission. 

(3) The appropriate Service Commission shall nDt recommend to. the Governor-General that any award for which a 
person who. holds or has held the office of a Justice of the Supreme Court Dr Justice of Appeal Dr 
Auditor-General is eligible' shall not be granted, Dr that any award payable to him shall be withheld, reduced 
in amount or suspended, on the ground that he has been guilty of misbehaviour unless he has been removed from 
office by reason of such misbehaviour. 

(4) In this Article and in Article 124 of this Constitution  the appropriate Service Commission" means- 

(a) in the case of an award that may be granted or is payable to' a person who, having been a public officer, 
was immediately before the date on which he ceased to hold public office serving- 

(i) as a Justice of the Supreme Court or Justice of Appeal ; 

(ii) in any public office to. which the provisions of Article 117 of this Constitution applied on that date, 

the Judicial and Legal Service Commission ; 

(b) in the case of an award that may be granted or is payable to. a person who, having been a public officer, 
was immediately before the date on which he ceased to. hold public office, serving as a member of the Police 
Force. the Police Service Commission : 

(c) in any other case the Public Service Commission. 

(5) In this Article" pension Jaw" means any law relating to the grant to any person or to. the widow, children.
 dependants. Dr personal re~re sentatives of \l1at person, of an award of any pension, compensation, gratuity 
or other like allowance in respect of the service of that person in a public office and includes any instrument
made under any such law. 

124.-{l) The provisions of this Article shall have effect for the purpose of enabling an officer or his 
personal representatives to appeal against any of the following decisions. that is to say :- 

(a) a decision of the appropriate Service Commission embodying a recommendation in respect of an officer, 
under Article 123(2) of this Constitution. not to grant. or to withhold. reduce in amount or suspend, an award; 

(b) a decision of any authority to remove an officer from office if the consequence of the removal is that an 
award cannot be granted in respect of the officer's service in a public office; or 

(c) a decision of any authority to take some other disciplinary action in relation to such an officer if the 
consequence of the action is or in the opinion of the authority might be, to reduce the amount of any award 
that may be granted in respect of the officer's service in a public office. 

(2) Where any such decision as is referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article is taken by any Commission or 
authority, the Commission or authority shall cause to be delivered to the officer concerned.tor to his personal
representatives. a written notice of tbat decision stating the time, not being less than twenty-eight days from
the date on which the notice is delivered. within which be, or his personal representatives, may apply to the 
Commission or authority for the case to be referred to the Public Service Board of Appeal. 

(3) The Board shall inquire into the facts of the case, and for that purposc- 

(a) shall, if the applicant so requests in writing, hear the applicant either in person or by a legal 
representative of his choice, according to the terms of the request, and shall consider any representations 
that he wishes to make in writing; 

(b) may hear any other person wbo, in the opinion of the Board, is able to give the Board information on the 
case; and 

(c) shall have access to, and shall consider. all documents that were available to the Commission or authority 
concerned and shall also consider any further document relating to the case that may be produced by or on 
behalf of the applicant or the Commission or authority. 

(4) When the Board has completed its consideration of the case, then- 

(0) if the decision that is the subject of reference to the Board is such a decision as is mentioned in 
sub-paragraph (1)(0) of this Article, the Board shall advise the appropriate Service Commission or authority 
whether the deoision should be affirmed, reversed or modified and the Commission or authority shall act in 
accordance with that advice; and 

(b) jf the decision that is the subject of the reference to the Board is such a decision as is referred to in 
sub-paragraph (l)(b) or (c) of this Article, the Doard shall not have power to advise the Com mission or 
authority concerned to affirm. reverse or modify the decision but- 

(i) where the officer has been removed from office the Board may direct that there shall be granted a11 or any 
part of the award that, under any law. might have been granted in respect of 

Procedure of Commisions. 

his service in a public office if he had retired voluntarily at the date of his removal and may direct that any 
law with respect to awards shall in any other respect that the Board may specify have effect as if he had so 
retired; and 

(ii) where some other disciplinary action has been taken in rela tion to the officer the Board may direct 
that, on the grant of any award under any law in respect of the officer's service in a public office. that 
award shall be increased by such amount or shall be calculated in such manner as the Board may specify in order
to offset all or any part of the reduction in the amount of that award that. in the opinion of the Board. 
would or might otherwise be a consequence of the disciplinary action. 

and any direction given by the Board under this sub-paragraph shall be complied with notwithstanding the 
provisions of any other law. 

(5) If the appeal relates to a case in which the officer exercises his right of appeal to the Board under 
Article 115(1) of this Constitution. the Board shall first consider his appeal under that Article and only if 
it -decides to affirm the decision or to make some other decision the consequence of which would be to affect 
the officer's award. shall the Board proceed to consider the officer's appeal under this Article. 

(6) For the purposes of this Article- 

(0)  legal representative" means a person entitled to practise in The Bahamas as a Counsel and Attorney of 
the Supreme Court; and 

(b) R notice shall be deemed to have been delivered to an officer one week after it has been posted if. in the 
case of an officer on pension and resident outside The Bahamas whose residential address cannot be ascertained.
it has been posted addressed to him at the address to which his pension is being paid. 

PART 7 

Miscellaneous 

125.-(1) In relation Ito any Commission established by this Chapter. the Governor-General. acting in accordance
with the advice of the Commission. may by regulation or otherwise regulate its procedure and. subject to the 
consent of the Prime Minister. confer powers and impose duties on any public officer or any authority of the 
Government for the purpose of the discharge of the functions of the Commission. 

(2) At any meeting of any Commission established by this Chapter a quorum shall be constituted if a majority of
the members are present : and. if a quorum is present. the Commission shall not be disqualified for the 
transaction of business by reason of any vacancy among its members or the absence of any member. and any 
proceedings of the Commission shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled so to do 
took part therein. 

(3) Any question proposed for decision at any meeting of any Commission ~stablished by this Chapter shall be 
determined by a majority of the votes of the members thereof present and voting. and if on any such question 
the votes are equally divided the member presiding shall have and exercise a casting vote. 


(4) Any question whether- 

(a) any Commission established by this Chapter has validly per formed any function vested in it by or under 
this Chapter; 

(b) any person has validly performed any function delegated to him; or 

(c) any member of such a Commission or any other person or autho rity has validly performed any other function
in relation to the work of the Commission, 

shall not be enquired into in any court. 

126  ....!...(l) A member of a Commission established under this Chapter may be removed from office only for 
inability to exercise the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other 
cause) or for misbehaviour and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 

(2) A member of a Commission shall be removed from office by tl.e Governor-General if the question of his 
removal from office "has been referred to a tribunal appointed under paragraph (3) of this Article and the 
tribunal has recommended to the Governor-General that he ought to be removed from office for inability as 
aforesaid or for misbehaviour. 

(3) If the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the prescribed authority, considers that 
the 'question of removing a member of a Commission under this Article ought to be investigated. then- 

(a) the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the prescribed authority shall appoint a 
tribunal which shall con sist of a chairman and not less than two other members. selected by the Chief 
Justice, or where the question concerns the Chairman of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission by the 
President of the Court of Appeal, from among persons who. hold or have held or are qualified to. hold office 
as a ' Justice of the Supreme Court; and 

(b) the tri'nmal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
recommend to him whether the member ought to be removed under this Article. 

(4) If the question of removing a member of a Commission has been referred to a tribunal under this Article, 
the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the prescribed authority, may suspend that member 
from the exercise of the functions of his office and any such suspension may be at any time revoked by the 
Governor-General. and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General
that that member should not be removed. 

(5) In this Artic1e- 

"Commission It includes the Public Service Board of Appeal;  the prescribed authority" means- 

(0) in relation to. the Public Service Commission or the Judicial and Legal Service Commission, the Prime 
Minister when the question concerns the Chairman of either of those Commissions, 


Removal from office of certain persons. 

and the Chairman of the Commission concerned when the ques tion concerns any other member of either of those 
commissions : and 

(b) in relation to the Public Service Board of Appeal or the Police Service Oomrnission. the Prime Minister. 

Public Service. 

127. In this Constitution references to the public service shall not be construed as including service in- 

(l!) the office of Governor-General. Prime Minister or other Minister, Parliamentary Secretary, Leader of the 
Opposition, President and Vice-President of the Senate, Senator. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of 
Assembly, or member of the House of Assembly; 

(b) the office of a member of the Public Service Commission, the Public Service Board of Appeal. the Judicial 
and Legal Service Commission or the Police Service Commission; 

(c) the staff of the Department of Tourism or of any other depart ment or agency of the Government established 
for special purposes by any law which specifies that offices therein shall not be public offices for the 
purposes of this Constitution; 

(d) the office of a member of any board. committee or other similar body (whether incorporated or not) 
established by any law in force in The Bahamas: or 

(e) except as otherwise provided in this Constitution the office of a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice 
of Appeal or any office on the personal staff of the Governor-General. 

CHAPTER IX 

FINANCE 

Consoli- 128. There shall be in and for The Bahamas a Consolidated Fund, dated Fund. into which. subject to 
the provisions of any law for the time being in force in The Bahamas. shall be paid aU revenues of The Bahamas. 

Estimates. 129.-{1) The Minister of Finance shall, before the end of each finan- 

cial year. cause to be prepared annual estimates of revenue and expen diture for public services during the 
succeeding financial year. which shall be laid before the House of Assembly. 

(2) The estimates of expenditure shall show separately the sums required to meet statutory expenditure (as 
defined in Article 130(7) of this Constitution) and the sums required to meet other expendi ture proposed to 
be paid out of the Consolidated Fund. 

Authority for Public Expenditure. 

130.-{1) The Minister of Finance shall, in respect of each financial year. at the earliest convenient moment 
before the commencement of that financial year, introduce in the House of Assembly an Appropriation Bill 
containing, under appropriate heads for the several services required. the estimated aggregate sums which are 
proposed to be expended (otherwise than by way of statutory expenditure) during that financial year. 


(2) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (6) of this Article. the sums set out in the Appropriation Act in respect of 
a financial year shall represent the limit and extent of the public expenditure for that financial year. 

(3) Where any sum is set out in the Appropriation Act in respect of a financial year and at the end of that 
year there is an unexpended balance of that sum. the unexpended balance shall lapse. 

(4) The Minister of Finance may. in case of necessity. from time to time cause to be prepared supplementary 
estimates of expenditure which shall be laid before and voted on by the House of Assembly. 

(5) In respect of all supplementary expenditure voted on by the House of Assembly in pursuance of paragraph (4)
of this Article, the Minister of Finance may. at any nime before the end of the financial year. introduce into 
the House of Assembly a Supplementary Appro priation Bill containing. under appropriate heads, the aggregate 
sums so voted and shall. as soon as possible after the end of each financial year. introduce into the House of 
Assembly a final Appropriation Bill containing any such sums which have not yet been included in any 
Appropriation Dill. 

(6) That part of any estimate of expenditure laid before the House of Assembly which shows statutory 
expenditure shall not be voted on by the House. and such expenditure shall. without further authority of 
Parliament. be paid out of the Consolidated Fund. 

(7) For the purposes of this Article and Article 129 of this Constitution- 

(a) "financial year" m.~ans any period of twelve months beginning on 1st January in any year or such other date 
as Parliament may prescribe; and 

(b) "statutory expenditure" means expenditure charged on the Con solidated Fund or on the gerieral revenues 
and assets of The Bahamas by any provision of this Constitution or of any other law for the time being in force 
in The Bahamas. 

131. No sum shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund except upon the authority of a warrant under the hand 
of the Minister of Finance or under the hand of some person authorised by him in writing; and sums so issued 
shall be disposed of for meeting public expenditure authorised under Article 130 of this Constitution or. in 
the case of statutory expenditure. for the purposes appointed by Jaw. 

132. Where at any time for any justifiable reason. the Appropriation Bill in respect of any financial year has 
not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year. the Minister of Finance may. to such an 
extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. or if no conditions have been prescribed on a 
resolution to that effect passed by the House of Assembly. issue a warrant for the payment out of the 
Consolidated Fund or other public funds of The Bahamas of such sums as he may consider necessary for the 
continuance of the public service. but a statement of the sums so authorised shall. as soon as practicable, be 
laid before and. voted on by the House of Assembly and the aggregate sums so voted shall be included. under 
the appro priate heads. in the next Appropriation Bill immediately following. 


Contin- 133.-(1) Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a gencies Fund. Contingencies Fund and 
may authorise the Minister of Finance to make advances from that Fund if he is satisfied that there is an 
unforeseen need for expenditure for which no provision or no sufficient provision has been made by an 
Appropriation Act. 

(2) Where any advances are made by virtue of an authorisation conferred under paragraph (1) of tbis Article. a 
supplementary estimate of the sums required to replace the amount so advanced shall. as soon as practicable. 
be laid before and voted on by the House of Assembly and the sums so voted shall be included in a Supplementary
Appropria tion Bill OIl' a Final Appropriation Bill. 

Public Debt. 

Remunera tion of Governor General and certain other officers. 

Establish ment of office and functions of Auditor General. 

134. The Public Debt of The Bahamas, including the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments and redemption 
monies in respect of that debt and the costs. charges and expenses incidental to the management of that debt. 
is hereby charged on the Consolidated Fund. 

135.-{1) There shall be paid Ito the holders of the offices to which this Article applies such salaries and 
allowances as may be prescribed by or under any law. 

(2) The salaries payable to the holders of the offices to which this Article applies are hereby charged on the 
Consolidated Fund. 

(3) The salary and allowances payable to the bolder of any office to which this Article applies and his other 
terms of service shall not be altered to his disadvantage after his appointment, and. for the purposes of this 
paragraph. in so far as the terms of service of any person depend upon the option of that person. the terms 
for which he opts shall be taken to be more advantageous to him than any other terms for which he might have 
opted. 

(4) This Article applies to the offices of Governor-General. Justice of the Supreme Court. Justice of Appeal. 
Auditor-General and member of any Commission established by Chapter VIII of this Constitution or of the Public 
Service Board of Appeal. 

136.-{l) There shall be an Auditor-General whose office shall be a public office. 

(2) TIle Auditor-General shall be appointed by the Governor-General. by instrument under the Public Seal. 
acting oil the recommendation of the Public Service Commission made after the Commission has consulted the 
Prime Minister. 

(3) The accounts of the Supreme Court, the Senate. the House of Assembly. all departments and offices of the 
Government (but excluding the Department of the Auditor-General), the Public Service Commission, the Judicial 
and Legal Service Commission. the Police Service Com mission and all Magistrates' Courts shall. at least once 
in every year. be audited and reported on by the Auditor-General who, with his subordinate staff. shall at all 
times be entitled to have access to all books. records. returns and reports relating to such accounts. 

(4) The Auditor-General shall submit his reports made under para graph (3) of this Article without undue delay
to the Speaker (or. if the office of Speaker is vacant or the Speaker is for any reason unable to perform the 
functions of his office. to the Deputy Speaker) who shall cause them to be laid before the House of Assembly 
without undue delay. 

(5) In the exercise of his functions under the provisions of paragraphs (~) and (4) of this Article. the 
Auditor-General shall not be subject to.the direction or control of any other person or authority. 

~p) The accounts of the department of the Auditor-General shall be audited and reported on by the Minister of 
Finance and the provisions of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this Article shall apply in relation to the exercise 
by that Minister of those functions as they apply in relation to audits and reports made by the Auditor-General. 

(7) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the performance by the Auditor-General of- 

(a) such other functions in relation to the accounts of the Government and the accounts of other public - 
authorities and other bodies administering public funds- in The Bahamas as may be prescribed by or under any 
Jaw for the time being in force in The Bahamas; or 

(b) such other functions in relation to the supervision and control of expenditure from public funds in The 
Bahamas as may be so prescribed. 

(8) The Auditor-General may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions thereof 
(whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. and shall not be so 
removed except in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (9) of this Article. 

(9) The Auditor-General shall be removed from office by the Governor-General if the question of his removal 
from office has been referred to a tribunal appointed under paragraph (10) of this Article and tfbe tribunal 
has recommended to the Governor-General that he ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or 
for misbehaviour. 

(10) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor-General that the question of removing the Auditor-General
from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour ought to be investigated. then- 

(a) the Governor-General shall appoint a tribunal. which shall con sist of a chairman and not less than two 
other members. selected by the Governor-General. acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial and Legal
Service Commission, from among persons who hold or have held or are eligible to hold high judicial office ; and
 

(b) the tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
recommend to the Governor General whether the Auditor-General ought to be removed from office for inability as
aforesaid or for misbehaviour. 

(11) If the question of removing the Auditor-General from office has been referred to a tribunal under 
paragraph (9) of this Article. the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service
Commission. may suspend the Auditor-General from per forming the functions of his office and any such 
suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General. and shall in any case cease to have effect if 
the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General that the Auditor-General should not be removed from office. 

Interpretation. 

CHAPTER X 

INTERPRETATION 

137.-(1) In this Constitution, unless it is otherwise provided or required by the context- 

" Act" or "Act of Parliament" means any law made by Parliament: 

 The Bahamas" means The Commonwealth of The Bahamas; "the Commonwealth" means, save as otherwise prescribed. 
The Bahamas. the United Kingdom, Canada. Australia, New Zealand. India. Sri Lanka, Ghana, Malaysia, Nigeria, 
Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Malta. Zambia, The Gambia,
Singapore, Guyana, Lesotho. Botswana. Barbados. Mauritius. Swaziland, Tonga, Fiji, Western Samoa, Nauru, 
Bangladesh and any dependency of any such country; 

" election" means an election of a member or members of the House of Assembly: 

 the Gazette" means the Official Gazette of The Bahamas; 

 House" means either the Senate or the House of Assembly or both. as the context may require; 

 high judicial office" means the office of judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and 
criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such 
court; 

" law ,t includes any instrument having the force of law and any un written rule of law . and" lawful" and" 
lawfully " shall be construed accordingly; 

" Minister" includes a temporary Minister appointed under Article 76 of this Constitution, except in relation 
to Articles 72. 73. 76 and 86 of this Constitution; 

"Minister of Finance" means the Minister, by whatever title styled. 

responsible for Government finance; 

" oath" includes affirmation; 

" Parliament" means the Parliament of The Bahamas; 

 the Police Force" means the Police Force established in and for The Bahamas and maintained under the 
provisions of the Police Act 1965(a) or any law amending or replacing that Act ~ 

" prescribed" means provided by or under an Act of Parliament; " public office" means, subject to the 
provisions of paragraph (6) of this Article and Article 127 of this Constitution, any office of emolument in 
the public service; 

" public officer" means the holder of any pub1ic office and includes any person appointed to act in any such 
office ; 

"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of Article 127 of this Constitution, the service of the 
Crown ~n a civil capacity in respect of the Government of The Bahamas; 

" session" means, in relation to a House, the sittings of that House commencing when it first meets after this 
Constitution comes 

(a) Statute Law of the Bahama Islands. No. 29 of 1965. 

into operation or after any general election or prorogation of Parlia ment and terminating when Parliament is 
prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued; 

" sitting" means. in relation to a House. a period during which that House is sitting continuously without 
adjournment and includes any period during which the House is in committee. 

(2) For the purposes of this Constitution the territory of The Bahamas shall comprise all ,the areas that were 
comprised <therein immediately before 10th July 1973 together with suoh other areas as Parliament may declare 
to form pad thereof. 

(3) For the purposes of Articles 42. 43. 48 and 49 of this Constitu tion- 

(a)  government contract" means, subjeot to such exceptions as Parliament may prescribe, any contract made 
with the Government of The Bahamas or with a department of that Government or with an officer of that 
Government contracting as such; and 

(b) a person shall be deemed to be interested in a government contract if- 

(i) subject to such exceptions as Parliament may prescribe, he is a party to such a contract or a partner in a 
firm or director or manager of a company which is a party to such a contract; or 

(ii) he is otherwise interested in such a contract in such manner as Parliament may prescribe. 

(4) In this Constitution, unless it is otherwise provided or required by the oontext- 

(a) any reference Ito the date on which this COnstitution comes into operation shall be construed as a 
reference to the appointed day referred to in section 1(2) of the Order in Council to which this Constitution 
is scheduled ; 

(b) any reference to a law (which term shall, without prejudice to the definition in paragraph (I) of this 
Article, include an Act) shall be construed as including a reference Ito a law made at any time before this 
Constitution comes into operation ; 

(c) any reference to power to make appointments to any office shall be construed as inc1uding a reference to 
power to make appoint ments on promotion and transfer Ito that office and to power to appoint a person to act 
in that office during any period during which it is vacant or the holder thereof is unable (whether by reason 
of absence or of infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) to perform the functions of that office : 

(d) any reference to the holder of an office by a term designating or describing his office shall be construed 
as including a reference to any person for the time being acting in that office or, to the extent of his 
authority. otherwise authorised to perform the functions of that office. 

(5) Where by this Constitution any person is directed. or power is conferred on any person or authority to 
appoint a person, to act in or otherwise to perform the functions of an office if the holder thereof is unable 
to perform the functions of that office. the validity of any performance of those functions by the person so 
directed or of any appointment made in exercise of that power shall not be called in question in any court on 
the ground that the holder of the office is not unable to perform the functions of the office. 

(6) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered to hold a public office by reason 
only thad: he is in receipt of 3; pension or other like allowance in respect of public service. 

(7) References in this Constitution to the power to remove a public officer from his office shall. subject to 
the provisions of this Constitu tion, be construed as including references to any power conferred by any law 
to require or permit that officer to retire from the public service. 

(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any provision of this Constitution that vests in any 
person or authority power to remove any public officer (other than a public officer mentioned in paragraph (9) 
of this Article) from his office shall be without prejudice to the power of any person or authority to abolish 
any office or to any law providing for the oompulsory retirement of public officers generally or any class of 
public officer on attaining an age specified therein. 

(9) If any circumstances arise that, under the provisions of this Constitution, require the Governor to remove 
a Justice of the Supreme Court or a Justice of Appeal or the Commissioner of Police, the Deputy Commissioner 
of Police or the Auditor-General from office for inability to discharge the functions of his office, such 
removal may be carried out either by dismissing that officer or by requiring him to retire. 

(10) Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make any proclamation, order, rules or regulations 
or to give any direction, the power shall be construed as including a power exercisable in like manner to 
amend or revoke any such proclamation, order, rules, regulations or direction. 

(11) Any person appointed to an office under any provision in this Constitution may resign that office. Except 
as otherwise provided in this Constitution such resignation shall be made in writing to the person in whom 
under this Constitution the power is vested to make appointments to the office concerned. 

(12) Where two or more persons are holding the same office by reason of an appointment made in pursuance of 
paragraph (4) of this Article, then- 

(0) for the purposes of any function conferred upon the holder of that office; and 

(b) for the purposes of any reference in this Constitution to the absence, illness or inability to perform 
the functions of his office or the holder of that office, 

the person last appointed to the office shall be deemed 10 be the sole holder of the office. 

(13) The Interpretation Act of The Bahamas(a) and all amendments thereto as in force on 10th July i973 shall 
apply, with the necessary adaptations. for the purpose of interpreting this Constitution and otherwise in 
relation thereto as it applies for the purpose of interpreting and in relation to Acts of Parliament of The 
Bahamas. 

(a) Statute Law of the Bahama Islands, Revised Edition 1965. C. 180. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE (This Note is not part 0/ the Order.) 

By virtue of the Bahamas Independence Act 1973, The Bahamas will attain fully responsible stanus within the 
Commonwealth on 10th July 1973. This Order makes provision for a Constitution for The Bahamas to come into 
effect on that day, including provision for the legislature, the executive government, the judicaJI.ure and 
the public service. The Constitution also contains provisions relating to citizen ship of The Bahamas and 
fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. 
