Canada
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 

30 & 31 Victoria, c. 3 (U.K.) 

An Act for the Union of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick, and the 
Government thereof; and for Purposes connected therewith 

(29th March 1867) 

WHEREAS the Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick have expressed 
their Desire to be federally united into One Dominion under the Crown of 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, with a Constitution similar in 
Principle to that of the United Kingdom: 

And whereas such a Union would conduce to the Welfare of the Provinces and 
promote the Interests of the British Empire: 

And whereas on the Establishment of the Union by Authority of Parliament it is 
expedient, not only that the Constitution of the Legislative Authority in the Dominion 
be provided for, but also that the Nature of the Executive Government therein be 
declared: 

And whereas it is expedient that Provision be made for the eventual Admission 
into the Union of other Parts of British North America: (1) 

I. PRELIMINARY 
Short title 

1. This Act may be cited as the Constitution Act, 1867. (2) 
2. Repealed. (3) 
(1) 
The enacting clause was repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., 

c. 14 (U.K.). It read as follows: 
Be it therefore enacted and declared by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent 
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority 
of the same, as follows: 

(2) 
As amended by the Constitution Act, 1982, which came into force on April 17, 1982. 
The section originally read as follows: 

1. This Act may be cited as The British North America Act, 1867. 
(3) 
Section 2, repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.), 
read as follows: 

2. The Provisions of this Act referring to Her Majesty the Queen extend also to the Heirs and Successors of 
Her Majesty, Kings and Queens of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. 

II. UNION 
Declaration of Union 

3. It shall be lawful for the Queen, by and with the Advice of Her Majesty’s 
Most Honourable Privy Council, to declare by Proclamation that, on and after a Day 
therein appointed, not being more than Six Months after the passing of this Act, the 
Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick shall form and be One Dominion 
under the Name of Canada; and on and after that Day those Three Provinces 
shall form and be One Dominion under that Name accordingly. (4) 
Construction of subsequent Provisions of Act 

4. Unless it is otherwise expressed or implied, the Name Canada shall be taken to 
mean Canada as constituted under this Act. (5) 
Four Provinces 

5. Canada shall be divided into Four Provinces, named Ontario, Quebec, Nova 
Scotia, and New Brunswick. (6) 
Provinces of Ontario and Quebec 

6. The Parts of the Province of Canada (as it exists at the passing of this Act) 
which formerly constituted respectively the Provinces of Upper Canada and Lower 
Canada shall be deemed to be severed, and shall form Two separate Provinces. The 
Part which formerly constituted the Province of Upper Canada shall constitute the 
Province of Ontario; and the Part which formerly constituted the Province of Lower 
Canada shall constitute the Province of Quebec. 
Provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 

7. The Provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick shall have the same Limits 
as at the passing of this Act. 
(4) 
The first day of July, 1867, was fixed by proclamation dated May 22, 1867. 

(5) 
Partially repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). 
The section originally read as follows: 

4. The subsequent Provisions of this Act shall, unless it is otherwise expressed or implied, commence and 
have effect on and after the Union, that is to say, on and after the Day appointed for the Union taking effect in 
the Queen’s Proclamation; and in the same Provisions, unless it is otherwise expressed or implied, the Name 
Canada shall be taken to mean Canada as constituted under this Act. 
(6) 
Canada now consists of ten provinces (Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, New 
Brunswick, Manitoba, British Columbia, Prince Edward Island, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and Newfoundland and Labrador) and three territories (Yukon, the 
Northwest Territories and Nunavut). 


Decennial Census 

8. 
In the general Census of the Population of Canada which is hereby required to 
be taken in the Year One thousand eight hundred and seventy-one, and in every 
Tenth Year thereafter, the respective Populations of the Four Provinces shall be distinguished. 
III. EXECUTIVE POWER 
Declaration of Executive Power in the Queen 

9. 
The Executive Government and Authority of and over Canada is hereby declared 
to continue and be vested in the Queen. 
Application of Provisions referring to Governor General 

10. 
The Provisions of this Act referring to the Governor General extend and apply 
to the Governor General for the Time being of Canada, or other the Chief Executive 
Officer or Administrator for the Time being carrying on the Government of 
Canada on behalf and in the Name of the Queen, by whatever Title he is designated. 
Constitution of Privy Council for Canada 

11. 
There shall be a Council to aid and advise in the Government of Canada, to 
be styled the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada; and the Persons who are to be 
Members of that Council shall be from Time to Time chosen and summoned by the 
Governor General and sworn in as Privy Councillors, and Members thereof may be 
from Time to Time removed by the Governor General. 
All Powers under Acts to be exercised by Governor General with Advice of Privy Council, or alone 

12. 
All Powers, Authorities, and Functions which under any Act of the Parliament 
of Great Britain, or of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Ireland, or of the Legislature of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, Canada, Nova 
Scotia, or New Brunswick, are at the Union vested in or exerciseable by the respective 
Governors or Lieutenant Governors of those Provinces, with the Advice, or 
with the Advice and Consent, of the respective Executive Councils thereof, or in 
conjunction with those Councils, or with any Number of Members thereof, or by 
those Governors or Lieutenant Governors individually, shall, as far as the same continue 
in existence and capable of being exercised after the Union in relation to the 
Government of Canada, be vested in and exerciseable by the Governor General, 
with the Advice or with the Advice and Consent of or in conjunction with the 
Queen’s Privy Council for Canada, or any Members thereof, or by the Governor 
General individually, as the Case requires, subject nevertheless (except with respect 
to such as exist under Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain or of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland) to be abolished or altered by the Parliament of Canada. (7) 

Application of Provisions referring to Governor General in Council 

13. The Provisions of this Act referring to the Governor General in Council shall 
be construed as referring to the Governor General acting by and with the Advice of 
the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada. 
Power to Her Majesty to authorize Governor General to appoint Deputies 

14. It shall be lawful for the Queen, if Her Majesty thinks fit, to authorize the 
Governor General from Time to Time to appoint any Person or any Persons jointly 
or severally to be his Deputy or Deputies within any Part or Parts of Canada, and in 
that Capacity to exercise during the Pleasure of the Governor General such of the 
Powers, Authorities, and Functions of the Governor General as the Governor General 
deems it necessary or expedient to assign to him or them, subject to any Limitations 
or Directions expressed or given by the Queen; but the Appointment of such a 
Deputy or Deputies shall not affect the Exercise by the Governor General himself of 
any Power, Authority, or Function. 
Command of Armed Forces to continue to be vested in the Queen 

15. The Command-in-Chief of the Land and Naval Militia, and of all Naval and 
Military Forces, of and in Canada, is hereby declared to continue and be vested in 
the Queen. 
Seat of Government of Canada 

16. Until the Queen otherwise directs, the Seat of Government of Canada shall 
be Ottawa. 
IV. LEGISLATIVE POWER 
Constitution of Parliament of Canada 

17. There shall be One Parliament for Canada, consisting of the Queen, an Upper 
House styled the Senate, and the House of Commons. 
Privileges, etc., of Houses 

18. The privileges, immunities, and powers to be held, enjoyed, and exercised by 
the Senate and by the House of Commons, and by the members thereof respectively, 
shall be such as are from time to time defined by Act of the Parliament of Canada, 
but so that any Act of the Parliament of Canada defining such privileges, immunities, 
and powers shall not confer any privileges, immunities, or powers exceeding 
those at the passing of such Act held, enjoyed, and exercised by the Commons 
House of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and by the 
members thereof. (8) 

First Session of the Parliament of Canada 

19. The Parliament of Canada shall be called together not later than Six Months 
after the Union. (9) 
20. Repealed. (10) 
THE SENATE 

Number of Senators 

21. The Senate shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, consist of One Hundred 
and five Members, who shall be styled Senators. (11) 
(8) 
Repealed and re-enacted by the Parliament of Canada Act, 1875, 38-39 Vict., c. 38 
(U.K.). The original section read as follows: 

18. The Privileges, Immunities, and Powers to be held, enjoyed, and exercised by the Senate and by the 
House of Commons and by the Members thereof respectively shall be such as are from Time to Time defined by 
Act of the Parliament of Canada, but so that the same shall never exceed those at the passing of this Act held, 
enjoyed, and exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 
and by the Members thereof. 
(9) 
Spent. The first session of the first Parliament began on November 6, 1867. 

(10) 
Section 20, repealed by the Constitution Act, 1982, read as follows: 

20. There shall be a Session of the Parliament of Canada once at least in every Year, so that Twelve Months 
shall not intervene between the last Sitting of the Parliament in one Session and its first sitting in the next Session. 
Section 20 has been replaced by section 5 of the Constitution Act, 1982, which pro-
vides that there shall be a sitting of Parliament at least once every twelve months. 

(11) 
As amended by the Constitution Act, 1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.) and modified by 
the Newfoundland Act, 12-13 Geo. VI, c. 22 (U.K.), the Constitution Act (No. 2), 1975, 

S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 53, and the Constitution Act, 1999 (Nunavut), S.C. 1998, c. 15, 
Part 2. The original section read as follows: 
21. The Senate shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, consist of Seventy-two Members, who shall be 
styled Senators. 
The Manitoba Act, 1870, added two senators for Manitoba; the British Columbia 
Terms of Union added three; upon admission of Prince Edward Island four more were 
provided by section 147 of the Constitution Act, 1867; the Alberta Act and the 
Saskatchewan Act each added four. The Senate was reconstituted at 96 by the Constitution 
Act, 1915. Six more senators were added upon union with Newfoundland, and one 
senator each was added for Yukon and the Northwest Territories by the Constitution 
Act (No. 2), 1975. One senator was added for Nunavut by the Constitution Act, 1999 
(Nunavut). 


Representation of Provinces in Senate 

22. In relation to the Constitution of the Senate Canada shall be deemed to consist 
of Four Divisions: 
1. 
Ontario; 
2. 
Quebec; 
3. 
The Maritime Provinces, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and Prince Edward 
Island; 
4. 
The Western Provinces of Manitoba, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta; 
which Four Divisions shall (subject to the Provisions of this Act) be equally represented 
in the Senate as follows: Ontario by twenty-four senators; Quebec by twentyfour 
senators; the Maritime Provinces and Prince Edward Island by twenty-four senators, 
ten thereof representing Nova Scotia, ten thereof representing New 
Brunswick, and four thereof representing Prince Edward Island; the Western 
Provinces by twenty-four senators, six thereof representing Manitoba, six thereof 
representing British Columbia, six thereof representing Saskatchewan, and six 
thereof representing Alberta; Newfoundland shall be entitled to be represented in 
the Senate by six members; the Yukon Territory, the Northwest Territories and 
Nunavut shall be entitled to be represented in the Senate by one member each. 

In the Case of Quebec each of the Twenty-four Senators representing that 
Province shall be appointed for One of the Twenty-four Electoral Divisions of Lower 
Canada specified in Schedule A. to Chapter One of the Consolidated Statutes of 
Canada. (12) 

(12) 
As amended by the Constitution Act, 1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.), the Newfoundland 
Act, 12-13 Geo. VI, c. 22 (U.K.), the Constitution Act (No. 2), 1975, 

S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 53 and the Constitution Act, 1999 (Nunavut), S.C. 1998, c. 15, Part 2. 
The original section read as follows: 
22. In relation to the Constitution of the Senate, Canada shall be deemed to consist of Three Divisions: 
1. Ontario; 
2. Quebec; 
3. The Maritime Provinces, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick; 
which Three Divisions shall (subject to the Provisions of this Act) be equally represented in the Senate as follows: 
Ontario by Twenty-four Senators; Quebec by Twenty-four Senators; and the Maritime Provinces by Twenty-
four Senators, Twelve thereof representing Nova Scotia, and Twelve thereof representing New Brunswick. 

In the case of Quebec each of the Twenty-four Senators representing that Province shall be appointed for One 
of the Twenty-four Electoral Divisions of Lower Canada specified in Schedule A. to Chapter One of the Consolidated 
Statutes of Canada. 

The reference in section 22 to the Consolidated Statutes of Canada is a reference to 
the Consolidated Statutes of 1859. 

Qualifications of Senator 

23. 
The Qualifications of a Senator shall be as follows: 
(1) 
He shall be of the full age of Thirty Years; 
(2) 
He shall be either a natural-born Subject of the Queen, or a Subject of the 
Queen naturalized by an Act of the Parliament of Great Britain, or of the 
Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, or of the 
Legislature of One of the Provinces of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, 
Canada, Nova Scotia, or New Brunswick, before the Union, or of the Parliament 
of Canada after the Union; 
(3) 
He shall be legally or equitably seised as of Freehold for his own Use and 
Benefit of Lands or Tenements held in Free and Common Socage, or seised 
or possessed for his own Use and Benefit of Lands or Tenements held in 
Franc-alleu or in Roture, within the Province for which he is appointed, of 
the Value of Four thousand Dollars, over and above all Rents, Dues, Debts, 
Charges, Mortgages, and Incumbrances due or payable out of or charged on 
or affecting the same; 
(4) 
His Real and Personal Property shall be together worth Four thousand Dollars 
over and above his Debts and Liabilities; 
(5) 
He shall be resident in the Province for which he is appointed; 
(6) 
In the Case of Quebec he shall have his Real Property Qualification in the 
Electoral Division for which he is appointed, or shall be resident in that Division. 
(13) 
(13) 
Section 44 of the Constitution Act, 1999 (Nunavut), S.C. 1998, c. 15, Part 2, provided 
that, for the purposes of that Part (which added one senator for Nunavut), the word 
“Province” in section 23 of the Constitution Act, 1867 has the same meaning as is assigned 
to the word “province” by section 35 of the Interpretation Act, R.S.C. 1985, 

c. I-21, as amended, which provides that the term “province” means “a province of 
Canada, and includes Yukon, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut”. 
Section 2 of the Constitution Act (No. 2), 1975, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 53, provided that 
for the purposes of that Act (which added one senator each for the Yukon Territory 
and the Northwest Territories) the term “Province” in section 23 of the Constitution 
Act, 1867 has the same meaning as is assigned to the term “province” by section 28 of 
the Interpretation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-23, which provides that the term “province” 
means “a province of Canada, and includes the Yukon Territory and the Northwest 
Territories”. 


Summons of Senator 

24. The Governor General shall from Time to Time, in the Queen’s Name, by 
Instrument under the Great Seal of Canada, summon qualified Persons to the Senate; 
and, subject to the Provisions of this Act, every Person so summoned shall become 
and be a Member of the Senate and a Senator. 
25. Repealed. (14) 
Addition of Senators in certain cases 

26. If at any Time on the Recommendation of the Governor General the Queen 
thinks fit to direct that Four or Eight Members be added to the Senate, the Governor 
General may by Summons to Four or Eight qualified Persons (as the Case may be), 
representing equally the Four Divisions of Canada, add to the Senate accordingly. 
(15) 

Reduction of Senate to normal Number 

27. In case of such Addition being at any Time made, the Governor General shall 
not summon any Person to the Senate, except on a further like Direction by the 
Queen on the like Recommendation, to represent one of the Four Divisions until 
such Division is represented by Twenty-four Senators and no more. (16) 
(14) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

25. Such Persons shall be first summoned to the Senate as the Queen by Warrant under Her Majesty’s Royal 
Sign Manual thinks fit to approve, and their Names shall be inserted in the Queen’s Proclamation of Union. 
(15) 
As amended by the Constitution Act, 1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.). The original 
section read as follows: 

26. If at any Time on the Recommendation of the Governor General the Queen thinks fit to direct that Three 
or Six Members be added to the Senate, the Governor General may by Summons to Three or Six qualified Persons 
(as the Case may be), representing equally the Three Divisions of Canada, add to the Senate accordingly. 
(16) 
As amended by the Constitution Act, 1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.). The original 
section read as follows: 

27. In case of such Addition being at any Time made the Governor General shall not summon any Person to 
the Senate except on a further like Direction by the Queen on the like Recommendation, until each of the Three 
Divisions of Canada is represented by Twenty-four Senators and no more. 

Maximum Number of Senators 

28. The Number of Senators shall not at any Time exceed One Hundred and thirteen. 
(17) 
Tenure of Place in Senate 

29. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a Senator shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, hold his place in the Senate for life. 
Retirement upon attaining age of seventy-five years 

(2) A Senator who is summoned to the Senate after the coming into force of this 
subsection shall, subject to this Act, hold his place in the Senate until he attains the 
age of seventy-five years. (18) 
Resignation of Place in Senate 

30. A Senator may by Writing under his Hand addressed to the Governor General 
resign his Place in the Senate, and thereupon the same shall be vacant. 
Disqualification of Senators 

31. 
The Place of a Senator shall become vacant in any of the following Cases: 
(1) 
If for Two consecutive Sessions of the Parliament he fails to give his Attendance 
in the Senate; 
(2) 
If he takes an Oath or makes a Declaration or Acknowledgment of Allegiance, 
Obedience, or Adherence to a Foreign Power, or does an Act whereby 
he becomes a Subject or Citizen, or entitled to the Rights or Privileges of 
a Subject or Citizen, of a Foreign Power; 
(3) 
If he is adjudged Bankrupt or Insolvent, or applies for the Benefit of any 
Law relating to Insolvent Debtors, or becomes a public Defaulter; 
(4) 
If he is attainted of Treason or convicted of Felony or of any infamous 
Crime; 
(17) 
As amended by the Constitution Act, 1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.), the Constitution 
Act (No. 2), 1975, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 53, and the Constitution Act, 1999 (Nunavut), 

S.C. 1998, c. 15, Part 2. The original section read as follows: 
28. The Number of Senators shall not at any Time exceed Seventy-eight. 
(18) 
As enacted by the Constitution Act, 1965, S.C. 1965, c. 4, which came into force on 
June 2, 1965. The original section read as follows: 

29. A Senator shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, hold his Place in the Senate for Life. 



(5) 
If he ceases to be qualified in respect of Property or of Residence; provided, 
that a Senator shall not be deemed to have ceased to be qualified in respect 
of Residence by reason only of his residing at the Seat of the Government of 
Canada while holding an Office under that Government requiring his Presence 
there. 
Summons on Vacancy in Senate 

32. When a Vacancy happens in the Senate by Resignation, Death, or otherwise, 
the Governor General shall by Summons to a fit and qualified Person fill the Vacancy. 
Questions as to Qualifications and Vacancies in Senate 

33. If any Question arises respecting the Qualification of a Senator or a Vacancy 
in the Senate the same shall be heard and determined by the Senate. 
Appointment of Speaker of Senate 

34. The Governor General may from Time to Time, by Instrument under the 
Great Seal of Canada, appoint a Senator to be Speaker of the Senate, and may remove 
him and appoint another in his Stead. (19) 
Quorum of Senate 

35. Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, the Presence of at least 
Fifteen Senators, including the Speaker, shall be necessary to constitute a Meeting 
of the Senate for the Exercise of its Powers. 
Voting in Senate 

36. Questions arising in the Senate shall be decided by a Majority of Voices, and 
the Speaker shall in all Cases have a Vote, and when the Voices are equal the Decision 
shall be deemed to be in the Negative. 
THE HOUSE OF COMMONS 

Constitution of House of Commons in Canada 

37. The House of Commons shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, consist 
of three hundred and eight members of whom one hundred and six shall be elected 
for Ontario, seventy-five for Quebec, eleven for Nova Scotia, ten for New 
(19) 
Provision for exercising the functions of Speaker during his or her absence is 
made by Part II of the Parliament of Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-1 (formerly the 
Speaker of the Senate Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. S-14). Doubts as to the power of Parliament 
to enact the Speaker of the Senate Act were removed by the Canadian Speaker (Appointment 
of Deputy) Act, 1895, 2nd Sess., 59 Vict., c. 3 (U.K.), which was repealed by the 
Constitution Act, 1982. 


Brunswick, fourteen for Manitoba, thirty-six for British Columbia, four for Prince 
Edward Island, twenty-eight for Alberta, fourteen for Saskatchewan, seven for 
Newfoundland, one for the Yukon Territory, one for the Northwest Territories and 
one for Nunavut. (20) 

Summoning of House of Commons 

38. The Governor General shall from Time to Time, in the Queen’s Name, by 
Instrument under the Great Seal of Canada, summon and call together the House of 
Commons. 
Senators not to sit in House of Commons 

39. A Senator shall not be capable of being elected or of sitting or voting as a 
Member of the House of Commons. 
Electoral districts of the four Provinces 

40. Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, Ontario, Quebec, Nova 
Scotia, and New Brunswick shall, for the Purposes of the Election of Members to 
serve in the House of Commons, be divided into Electoral Districts as follows: 
1. ONTARIO 
Ontario shall be divided into the Counties, Ridings of Counties, Cities, Parts of 
Cities, and Towns enumerated in the First Schedule to this Act, each whereof shall 
be an Electoral District, each such District as numbered in that Schedule being entitled 
to return One Member. 

2. QUEBEC 
Quebec shall be divided into Sixty-five Electoral Districts, composed of the Sixty-
five Electoral Divisions into which Lower Canada is at the passing of this Act 
divided under Chapter Two of the Consolidated Statutes of Canada, Chapter Seventy-
five of the Consolidated Statutes for Lower Canada, and the Act of the Province 
of Canada of the Twenty-third Year of the Queen, Chapter One, or any other Act 
amending the same in force at the Union, so that each such Electoral Division shall 
be for the Purposes of this Act an Electoral District entitled to return One Member. 

(20) 
The figures given here result from the application of section 51, as enacted by the 
Constitution Act, 1985 (Representation), S.C. 1986, c. 8, Part I, and amended by the 
Constitution Act, 1999 (Nunavut), S.C. 1998, c. 15, Part 2, and readjustments made pur-
suant to the Electoral Boundaries Readjustment Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-3. The original 
section (which was altered from time to time as the result of the addition of new 
provinces and changes in population) read as follows: 

37. The House of Commons shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, consist of one hundred and eightyone 
members, of whom Eighty-two shall be elected for Ontario, Sixty-five for Quebec, Nineteen for Nova Scotia, 
and Fifteen for New Brunswick. 

3. NOVA SCOTIA 
Each of the Eighteen Counties of Nova Scotia shall be an Electoral District. The 
County of Halifax shall be entitled to return Two Members, and each of the other 
Counties One Member. 

4. NEW BRUNSWICK 
Each of the Fourteen Counties into which New Brunswick is divided, including 
the City and County of St. John, shall be an Electoral District. The City of St. John 
shall also be a separate Electoral District. Each of those Fifteen Electoral Districts 
shall be entitled to return One Member. (21) 

Continuance of existing Election Laws until Parliament of Canada otherwise provides 

41. Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, all Laws in force in the 
several Provinces at the Union relative to the following Matters or any of them, 
namely, — the Qualifications and Disqualifications of Persons to be elected or to sit 
or vote as Members of the House of Assembly or Legislative Assembly in the several 
Provinces, the Voters at Elections of such Members, the Oaths to be taken by 
Voters, the Returning Officers, their Powers and Duties, the Proceedings at Elections, 
the Periods during which Elections may be continued, the Trial of controverted 
Elections, and Proceedings incident thereto, the vacating of Seats of Members, 
and the Execution of new Writs in case of Seats vacated otherwise than by Dissolution, 
— shall respectively apply to Elections of Members to serve in the House of 
Commons for the same several Provinces. 
Provided that, until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, at any Election 
for a Member of the House of Commons for the District of Algoma, in addition to 
Persons qualified by the Law of the Province of Canada to vote, every Male British 
Subject, aged Twenty-one Years or upwards, being a Householder, shall have a 
Vote. (22) 

(21) 
Spent. The electoral districts are now established by proclamations issued from 
time to time under the Electoral Boundaries Readjustment Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-3, as 
amended for particular districts by Acts of Parliament (see the most recent Table of 
Public Statutes and Responsible Ministers). 

(22) 
Spent. Elections are now provided for by the Canada Elections Act, S.C. 2000, c. 9; 
qualifications and disqualifications of members by the Parliament of Canada Act, 

R.S.C. 1985, c. P-1. The right of citizens to vote and hold office is provided for in section 
3 of the Constitution Act, 1982. 


42. Repealed. (23) 
43. Repealed. (24) 
As to Election of Speaker of House of Commons 

44. The House of Commons on its first assembling after a General Election shall 
proceed with all practicable Speed to elect One of its Members to be Speaker. 
As to filling up Vacancy in Office of Speaker 

45. In case of a Vacancy happening in the Office of Speaker by Death, Resignation, 
or otherwise, the House of Commons shall with all practicable Speed proceed 
to elect another of its Members to be Speaker. 
Speaker to preside 

46. The Speaker shall preside at all Meetings of the House of Commons. 
Provision in case of Absence of Speaker 

47. Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, in case of the Absence 
for any Reason of the Speaker from the Chair of the House of Commons for a Period 
of Forty-eight consecutive Hours, the House may elect another of its Members to 
act as Speaker, and the Member so elected shall during the Continuance of such Absence 
of the Speaker have and execute all the Powers, Privileges, and Duties of 
Speaker. (25) 
(23) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

42. For the First Election of Members to serve in the House of Commons the Governor General shall cause 
Writs to be issued by such Person, in such Form, and addressed to such Returning Officers as he thinks fit. 
The Person issuing Writs under this Section shall have the like Powers as are possessed at the Union by the 
Officers charged with the issuing of Writs for the Election of Members to serve in the respective House of Assembly 
or Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada, Nova Scotia, or New Brunswick; and the Returning 
Officers to whom Writs are directed under this Section shall have the like Powers as are possessed at the Union 
by the Officers charged with the returning of Writs for the Election of Members to serve in the same respective 
House of Assembly or Legislative Assembly. 

(24) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

43. In case a Vacancy in the Representation in the House of Commons of any Electoral District happens before 
the Meeting of the Parliament, or after the Meeting of the Parliament before Provision is made by the Parliament 
in this Behalf, the Provisions of the last foregoing Section of this Act shall extend and apply to the issuing 
and returning of a Writ in respect of such Vacant District. 
(25) 
Provision for exercising the functions of Speaker during his or her absence is now 
made by Part III of the Parliament of Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-1. 

Quorum of House of Commons 

48. The Presence of at least Twenty Members of the House of Commons shall be 
necessary to constitute a Meeting of the House for the Exercise of its Powers, and 
for that Purpose the Speaker shall be reckoned as a Member. 
Voting in House of Commons 

49. Questions arising in the House of Commons shall be decided by a Majority 
of Voices other than that of the Speaker, and when the Voices are equal, but not 
otherwise, the Speaker shall have a Vote. 
Duration of House of Commons 

50. Every House of Commons shall continue for Five Years from the Day of the 
Return of the Writs for choosing the House (subject to be sooner dissolved by the 
Governor General), and no longer. (26) 
Readjustment of representation in Commons 

51. (1) The number of members of the House of Commons and the representation 
of the provinces therein shall, on the completion of each decennial census, be 
readjusted by such authority, in such manner, and from such time as the Parliament 
of Canada provides from time to time, subject and according to the following rules: 
Rules 

1. 
There shall be assigned to each of the provinces a number of members equal 
to the number obtained by dividing the population of the province by the 
electoral quotient and rounding up any fractional remainder to one. 
2. 
If the number of members assigned to a province by the application of rule 1 
and section 51A is less than the total number assigned to that province on 
the date of the coming into force of the Constitution Act, 1985 (Representation), 
there shall be added to the number of members so assigned such number 
of members as will result in the province having the same number of 
members as were assigned on that date. 
3. 
After the application of rules 1 and 2 and section 51A, there shall, in respect 
of each province that meets the condition set out in rule 4, be added, if nec(
26) 
The term of the 12th Parliament was extended by the British North America Act, 
1916, 6-7 Geo. V., c. 19 (U.K.), which Act was repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 
1927, 17-18 Geo. V, c. 42 (U.K.). See also the Constitution Act, 1982, subsection 4(1), 
which provides that no House of Commons shall continue for longer than five years 
from the date fixed for the return of the writs at a general election of its members, and 
subsection 4(2), which provides for continuation of the House of Commons in special 
circumstances. 


essary, a number of members such that, on the completion of the readjustment, 
the number obtained by dividing the number of members assigned to 
that province by the total number of members assigned to all the provinces is 
as close as possible to, without being below, the number obtained by dividing 
the population of that province by the total population of all the 
provinces. 

4. 
Rule 3 applies to a province if, on the completion of the preceding readjustment, 
the number obtained by dividing the number of members assigned to 
that province by the total number of members assigned to all the provinces 
was equal to or greater than the number obtained by dividing the population 
of that province by the total population of all the provinces, the population 
of each province being its population as at July 1 of the year of the decennial 
census that preceded that readjustment according to the estimates prepared 
for the purpose of that readjustment. 
5. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, in these rules, the population of a 
province is the estimate of its population as at July 1 of the year of the most 
recent decennial census. 
6. 
In these rules, “electoral quotient” means 
(a) 111,166, in relation to the readjustment following the completion of the 
2011 decennial census, and 
(b) in relation to the readjustment following the completion of any subsequent 
decennial census, the number obtained by multiplying the electoral 
quotient that was applied in the preceding readjustment by the 
number that is the average of the numbers obtained by dividing the 
population of each province by the population of the province as at July 
1 of the year of the preceding decennial census according to the estimates 
prepared for the purpose of the preceding readjustment, and 
rounding up any fractional remainder of that multiplication to one. 


Population estimates 

(1.1) For the purpose of the rules in subsection (1), there is required to be prepared 
an estimate of the population of Canada and of each province as at July 1, 
2001 and July 1, 2011 — and, in each year following the 2011 decennial census in 
which a decennial census is taken, as at July 1 of that year — by such authority, in 
such manner, and from such time as the Parliament of Canada provides from time to 
time. (27) 
(27) 
As enacted by the Fair Representation Act, S.C. 2011, c. 26, s. 2, which came into 
force on royal assent on December 16, 2011. 

The section, as originally enacted, read as follows: 

51. On the Completion of the Census in the Year One Thousand eight hundred and seventy-one, and of each 
subsequent decennial Census, the Representation of the Four Provinces shall be readjusted by such Authority, in 
such Manner, and from such Time, as the Parliament of Canada from Time to Time provides, subject and according 
to the following Rules: 
(1) Quebec shall have the fixed Number of Sixty-five Members: 
(2) There shall be assigned to each of the other Provinces such a Number of Members as will bear the same 
Proportion to the Number of its Population (ascertained at such Census) as the Number Sixty-five bears to the 
Number of the Population of Quebec (so ascertained): 
(3) In the Computation of the Number of Members for a Province a fractional Part not exceeding One Half of 
the whole Number requisite for entitling the Province to a Member shall be disregarded; but a fractional Part 
exceeding One Half of that Number shall be equivalent to the whole Number: 
(4) On any such Re-adjustment the Number of Members for a Province shall not be reduced unless the Proportion 
which the Number of the Population of the Province bore to the Number of the aggregate Population of 
Canada at the then last preceding Re-adjustment of the Number of Members for the Province is ascertained at the 
then latest Census to be diminished by One Twentieth Part or upwards: 
(5) Such Re-adjustment shall not take effect until the Termination of the then existing Parliament. 
For further details, see endnote 2.


Yukon Territory, Northwest Territories and Nunavut 

(2) The Yukon Territory as bounded and described in the schedule to chapter 
Y-2 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1985, shall be entitled to one member, 
the Northwest Territories as bounded and described in section 2 of chapter N-27 of 
the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1985, as amended by section 77 of chapter 28 of the 
Statutes of Canada, 1993, shall be entitled to one member, and Nunavut as bounded 
and described in section 3 of chapter 28 of the Statutes of Canada, 1993, shall be 
entitled to one member. (28) 
Constitution of House of Commons 

51A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act a province shall always be entitled to 
a number of members in the House of Commons not less than the number of senators 
representing such province. (29) 

Increase of Number of House of Commons 

52. The Number of Members of the House of Commons may be from Time to 
Time increased by the Parliament of Canada, provided the proportionate Representation 
of the Provinces prescribed by this Act is not thereby disturbed. 
MONEY VOTES; ROYAL ASSENT 

Appropriation and Tax Bills 

53. Bills for appropriating any Part of the Public Revenue, or for imposing any 
Tax or Impost, shall originate in the House of Commons. 
Recommendation of Money Votes 

54. It shall not be lawful for the House of Commons to adopt or pass any Vote, 
Resolution, Address, or Bill for the Appropriation of any Part of the Public Revenue, 
or of any Tax or Impost, to any Purpose that has not been first recommended 
to that House by Message of the Governor General in the Session in which such 
Vote, Resolution, Address, or Bill is proposed. 
(28) 
As enacted by the Constitution Act, 1999 (Nunavut), S.C. 1998, c. 15, Part 2. Note 
that the description of the territory of Yukon is now set out in Schedule 1 to the Yukon 
Act, S.C. 2002, c. 7, which replaced R.S.C. 1985, c. Y-2. Subsection 51(2) was previously 
amended by the Constitution Act (No. 1), 1975, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 28, and read as 
follows: 

(2) The Yukon Territory as bounded and described in the schedule to chapter Y-2 of the Revised Statutes of 
Canada, 1970, shall be entitled to one member, and the Northwest Territories as bounded and described in section 
2 of chapter N-22 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, shall be entitled to two members. 
(29) 
As enacted by the Constitution Act, 1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.). 



Royal Assent to Bills, etc. 

55. 
Where a Bill passed by the Houses of the Parliament is presented to the Governor 
General for the Queen’s Assent, he shall declare, according to his Discretion, 
but subject to the Provisions of this Act and to Her Majesty’s Instructions, either 
that he assents thereto in the Queen’s Name, or that he withholds the Queen’s As-
sent, or that he reserves the Bill for the Signification of the Queen’s Pleasure. 
Disallowance by Order in Council of Act assented to by Governor General 

56. 
Where the Governor General assents to a Bill in the Queen’s Name, he shall 
by the first convenient Opportunity send an authentic Copy of the Act to One of Her 
Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, and if the Queen in Council within Two 
Years after Receipt thereof by the Secretary of State thinks fit to disallow the Act, 
such Disallowance (with a Certificate of the Secretary of State of the Day on which 
the Act was received by him) being signified by the Governor General, by Speech 
or Message to each of the Houses of the Parliament or by Proclamation, shall annul 
the Act from and after the Day of such Signification. 
Signification of Queen’s Pleasure on Bill reserved 

57. 
A Bill reserved for the Signification of the Queen’s Pleasure shall not have 
any Force unless and until, within Two Years from the Day on which it was presented 
to the Governor General for the Queen’s Assent, the Governor General signifies, 
by Speech or Message to each of the Houses of the Parliament or by Proclamation, 
that it has received the Assent of the Queen in Council. 
An Entry of every such Speech, Message, or Proclamation shall be made in the 
Journal of each House, and a Duplicate thereof duly attested shall be delivered to 
the proper Officer to be kept among the Records of Canada. 

V. PROVINCIAL CONSTITUTIONS 
EXECUTIVE POWER 
Appointment of Lieutenant Governors of Provinces 

58. 
For each Province there shall be an Officer, styled the Lieutenant Governor, 
appointed by the Governor General in Council by Instrument under the Great Seal 
of Canada. 
Tenure of Office of Lieutenant Governor 

59. 
A Lieutenant Governor shall hold Office during the Pleasure of the Governor 
General; but any Lieutenant Governor appointed after the Commencement of the 
First Session of the Parliament of Canada shall not be removeable within Five Years 
from his Appointment, except for Cause assigned, which shall be communicated to 
him in Writing within One Month after the Order for his Removal is made, and 
shall be communicated by Message to the Senate and to the House of Commons 


within One Week thereafter if the Parliament is then sitting, and if not then within 
One Week after the Commencement of the next Session of the Parliament. 

Salaries of Lieutenant Governors 

60. The Salaries of the Lieutenant Governors shall be fixed and provided by the 
Parliament of Canada. (30) 
Oaths, etc., of Lieutenant Governor 

61. Every Lieutenant Governor shall, before assuming the Duties of his Office, 
make and subscribe before the Governor General or some Person authorized by him 
Oaths of Allegiance and Office similar to those taken by the Governor General. 
Application of Provisions referring to Lieutenant Governor 

62. The Provisions of this Act referring to the Lieutenant Governor extend and 
apply to the Lieutenant Governor for the Time being of each Province, or other the 
Chief Executive Officer or Administrator for the Time being carrying on the Government 
of the Province, by whatever Title he is designated. 
Appointment of Executive Officers for Ontario and Quebec 

63. The Executive Council of Ontario and of Quebec shall be composed of such 
Persons as the Lieutenant Governor from Time to Time thinks fit, and in the first 
instance of the following Officers, namely, — the Attorney General, the Secretary 
and Registrar of the Province, the Treasurer of the Province, the Commissioner of 
Crown Lands, and the Commissioner of Agriculture and Public Works, with in 
Quebec the Speaker of the Legislative Council and the Solicitor General. (31) 
Executive Government of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 

64. The Constitution of the Executive Authority in each of the Provinces of Nova 
Scotia and New Brunswick shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, continue as it 
exists at the Union until altered under the Authority of this Act. (32) 
Powers to be exercised by Lieutenant Governor of Ontario or Quebec with Advice, or alone 

65. All Powers, Authorities, and Functions which under any Act of the Parliament 
of Great Britain, or of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
(30) 
Provided for by the Salaries Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-3. 

(31) 
Now provided for in Ontario by the Executive Council Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.25, 
and in Quebec by the Executive Power Act, R.S.Q., c. E-18. 

(32) 
A similar provision was included in each of the instruments admitting British 
Columbia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland. The Executive Authorities for 
Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan were established by the statutes creating those 
provinces. See footnote (6) to section 5, above. 



and Ireland, or of the Legislature of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, or Canada, were 
or are before or at the Union vested in or exerciseable by the respective Governors 
or Lieutenant Governors of those Provinces, with the Advice or with the Advice and 
Consent of the respective Executive Councils thereof, or in conjunction with those 
Councils, or with any Number of Members thereof, or by those Governors or Lieutenant 
Governors individually, shall, as far as the same are capable of being exercised 
after the Union in relation to the Government of Ontario and Quebec respectively, 
be vested in and shall or may be exercised by the Lieutenant Governor of 
Ontario and Quebec respectively, with the Advice or with the Advice and Consent 
of or in conjunction with the respective Executive Councils, or any Members thereof, 
or by the Lieutenant Governor individually, as the Case requires, subject nevertheless 
(except with respect to such as exist under Acts of the Parliament of Great 
Britain, or of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,) to 
be abolished or altered by the respective Legislatures of Ontario and Quebec. (33) 

Application of Provisions referring to Lieutenant Governor in Council 

66. The Provisions of this Act referring to the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
shall be construed as referring to the Lieutenant Governor of the Province acting by 
and with the Advice of the Executive Council thereof. 
Administration in Absence, etc., of Lieutenant Governor 

67. The Governor General in Council may from Time to Time appoint an Administrator 
to execute the Office and Functions of Lieutenant Governor during his 
Absence, Illness, or other Inability. 
Seats of Provincial Governments 

68. Unless and until the Executive Government of any Province otherwise directs 
with respect to that Province, the Seats of Government of the Provinces shall 
be as follows, namely, — of Ontario, the City of Toronto; of Quebec, the City of 
Quebec; of Nova Scotia, the City of Halifax; and of New Brunswick, the City of 
Fredericton. 
LEGISLATIVE POWER 

1. Ontario 
Legislature for Ontario 

69. There shall be a Legislature for Ontario consisting of the Lieutenant Governor 
and of One House, styled the Legislative Assembly of Ontario. 
(33) 
See footnote (65) to section 129, below. 


Electoral districts 

70. The Legislative Assembly of Ontario shall be composed of Eighty-two Members, 
to be elected to represent the Eighty-two Electoral Districts set forth in the 
First Schedule to this Act. (34) 
2. Quebec 
Legislature for Quebec 

71. There shall be a Legislature for Quebec consisting of the Lieutenant Governor 
and of Two Houses, styled the Legislative Council of Quebec and the Legislative 
Assembly of Quebec. (35) 
Constitution of Legislative Council 

72. The Legislative Council of Quebec shall be composed of Twenty-four Members, 
to be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor, in the Queen’s Name, by Instrument 
under the Great Seal of Quebec, one being appointed to represent each of the 
Twenty-four Electoral Divisions of Lower Canada in this Act referred to, and each 
holding Office for the Term of his Life, unless the Legislature of Quebec otherwise 
provides under the Provisions of this Act. 
Qualification of Legislative Councillors 

73. The Qualifications of the Legislative Councillors of Quebec shall be the 
same as those of the Senators for Quebec. 
Resignation, Disqualification, etc. 

74. The Place of a Legislative Councillor of Quebec shall become vacant in the 
Cases, mutatis mutandis, in which the Place of Senator becomes vacant. 
Vacancies 

75. When a Vacancy happens in the Legislative Council of Quebec by Resignation, 
Death, or otherwise, the Lieutenant Governor, in the Queen’s Name, by Instrument 
under the Great Seal of Quebec, shall appoint a fit and qualified Person to fill 
the Vacancy. 
(34) 
Spent. Now covered by the Representation Act, 2005, S.O. 2005, c. 35, Schedule 1. 

(35) 
An Act respecting the Legislative Council of Quebec, S.Q. 1968, c. 9, provided that 
the Legislature for Quebec shall consist of the Lieutenant Governor and the National 
Assembly of Quebec, and repealed the provisions of the Legislature Act, R.S.Q. 1964, 

c. 6, relating to the Legislative Council of Quebec. Now covered by the National Assembly 
Act, R.S.Q. c. A-23.1. Sections 72 to 79 following are therefore completely spent.  


Questions as to Vacancies, etc. 

76. If any Question arises respecting the Qualification of a Legislative Councillor 
of Quebec, or a Vacancy in the Legislative Council of Quebec, the same shall be 
heard and determined by the Legislative Council. 
Speaker of Legislative Council 

77. The Lieutenant Governor may from Time to Time, by Instrument under the 
Great Seal of Quebec, appoint a Member of the Legislative Council of Quebec to be 
Speaker thereof, and may remove him and appoint another in his Stead. 
Quorum of Legislative Council 

78. Until the Legislature of Quebec otherwise provides, the Presence of at least 
Ten Members of the Legislative Council, including the Speaker, shall be necessary 
to constitute a Meeting for the Exercise of its Powers. 
Voting in Legislative Council 

79. Questions arising in the Legislative Council of Quebec shall be decided by a 
Majority of Voices, and the Speaker shall in all Cases have a Vote, and when the 
Voices are equal the Decision shall be deemed to be in the Negative. 
Constitution of Legislative Assembly of Quebec 

80. The Legislative Assembly of Quebec shall be composed of Sixty-five Members, 
to be elected to represent the Sixty-five Electoral Divisions or Districts of 
Lower Canada in this Act referred to, subject to Alteration thereof by the Legislature 
of Quebec: Provided that it shall not be lawful to present to the Lieutenant Governor 
of Quebec for Assent any Bill for altering the Limits of any of the Electoral 
Divisions or Districts mentioned in the Second Schedule to this Act, unless the Second 
and Third Readings of such Bill have been passed in the Legislative Assembly 
with the Concurrence of the Majority of the Members representing all those Electoral 
Divisions or Districts, and the Assent shall not be given to such Bill unless an 
Address has been presented by the Legislative Assembly to the Lieutenant Governor 
stating that it has been so passed. (36) 
3. Ontario and Quebec 
81. Repealed. (37) 
(36) 
An Act respecting the electoral districts, S.Q. 1970, c. 7, provides that this section no 
longer has effect. 

(37) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

81. The Legislatures of Ontario and Quebec respectively shall be called together not later than Six Months 
after the Union. 


Summoning of Legislative Assemblies 

82. The Lieutenant Governor of Ontario and of Quebec shall from Time to Time, 
in the Queen’s Name, by Instrument under the Great Seal of the Province, summon 
and call together the Legislative Assembly of the Province. 
Restriction on election of Holders of offices 

83. Until the Legislature of Ontario or of Quebec otherwise provides, a Person 
accepting or holding in Ontario or in Quebec any Office, Commission, or Employment, 
permanent or temporary, at the Nomination of the Lieutenant Governor, to 
which an annual Salary, or any Fee, Allowance, Emolument, or Profit of any Kind 
or Amount whatever from the Province is attached, shall not be eligible as a Member 
of the Legislative Assembly of the respective Province, nor shall he sit or vote 
as such; but nothing in this Section shall make ineligible any Person being a Member 
of the Executive Council of the respective Province, or holding any of the following 
Offices, that is to say, the Offices of Attorney General, Secretary and Registrar 
of the Province, Treasurer of the Province, Commissioner of Crown Lands, and 
Commissioner of Agriculture and Public Works, and in Quebec Solicitor General, 
or shall disqualify him to sit or vote in the House for which he is elected, provided 
he is elected while holding such Office. (38) 
Continuance of existing Election Laws 

84. Until the legislatures of Ontario and Quebec respectively otherwise provide, 
all Laws which at the Union are in force in those Provinces respectively, relative to 
the following Matters, or any of them, namely, — the Qualifications and Disqualifications 
of Persons to be elected or to sit or vote as Members of the Assembly of 
Canada, the Qualifications or Disqualifications of Voters, the Oaths to be taken by 
Voters, the Returning Officers, their Powers and Duties, the Proceedings at Elections, 
the Periods during which such Elections may be continued, and the Trial of 
controverted Elections and the Proceedings incident thereto, the vacating of the 
Seats of Members and the issuing and execution of new Writs in case of Seats vacated 
otherwise than by Dissolution, — shall respectively apply to Elections of 
Members to serve in the respective Legislative Assemblies of Ontario and Quebec. 
(38) 
Probably spent. The subject-matter of this section is now covered in Ontario by 
the Legislative Assembly Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.10, and in Quebec by the National Assembly 
Act, R.S.Q. c. A-23.1. 


Provided that, until the Legislature of Ontario otherwise provides, at any Election 
for a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario for the District of Algoma, in 
addition to Persons qualified by the Law of the Province of Canada to vote, every 
Male British Subject, aged Twenty-one Years or upwards, being a Householder, 
shall have a Vote. (39) 

Duration of Legislative Assemblies 

85. Every Legislative Assembly of Ontario and every Legislative Assembly of 
Quebec shall continue for Four Years from the Day of the Return of the Writs for 
choosing the same (subject nevertheless to either the Legislative Assembly of Ontario 
or the Legislative Assembly of Quebec being sooner dissolved by the Lieutenant 
Governor of the Province), and no longer. (40) 
Yearly Session of Legislature 

86. There shall be a Session of the Legislature of Ontario and of that of Quebec 
once at least in every Year, so that Twelve Months shall not intervene between the 
last Sitting of the Legislature in each Province in one Session and its first Sitting in 
the next Session. (41) 
Speaker, Quorum, etc. 

87. The following Provisions of this Act respecting the House of Commons of 
Canada shall extend and apply to the Legislative Assemblies of Ontario and Que-
bec, that is to say, — the Provisions relating to the Election of a Speaker originally 
and on Vacancies, the Duties of the Speaker, the Absence of the Speaker, the Quorum, 
and the Mode of voting, as if those Provisions were here re-enacted and made 
applicable in Terms to each such Legislative Assembly. 
(39) 
Probably spent. The subject-matter of this section is now covered in Ontario by 
the Election Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.6, and the Legislative Assembly Act, R.S.O. 1990, 

c. L.10, and in Quebec by the Election Act, R.S.Q. c. E-3.3 and the National Assembly 
Act, R.S.Q. c. A-23.1. 
(40) 
The maximum duration of the Legislative Assembly of Quebec has been changed 
to five years. See the National Assembly Act, R.S.Q. c. A-23.1. See also section 4 of the 
Constitution Act, 1982, which provides a maximum duration for a legislative assembly 
of five years but also authorizes continuation in special circumstances. 

(41) 
See also section 5 of the Constitution Act, 1982, which provides that there shall be a 
sitting of each legislature at least once every twelve months. 


4. Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 
Constitutions of Legislatures of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 

88. The Constitution of the Legislature of each of the Provinces of Nova Scotia 
and New Brunswick shall, subject to the Provisions of this Act, continue as it exists 
at the Union until altered under the Authority of this Act. (42) 
5. Ontario, Quebec, and Nova Scotia 
89. Repealed. (43) 
6. The Four Provinces 
Application to Legislatures of Provisions respecting Money Votes, etc. 

90. The following Provisions of this Act respecting the Parliament of Canada, 
namely, — the Provisions relating to Appropriation and Tax Bills, the Recommendation 
of Money Votes, the Assent to Bills, the Disallowance of Acts, and the Signification 
of Pleasure on Bills reserved, — shall extend and apply to the Legislatures 
of the several Provinces as if those Provisions were here re-enacted and made applicable 
in Terms to the respective Provinces and the Legislatures thereof, with the 
Substitution of the Lieutenant Governor of the Province for the Governor General, 
(42) 
Partially repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.), 
which deleted the following concluding words of the original enactment: 

and the House of Assembly of New Brunswick existing at the passing of this Act shall, unless soooner dissolved, 
continue for the Period for which it was elected. 

A similar provision was included in each of the instruments admitting British 
Columbia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland. The Legislatures of Manitoba, 
Alberta and Saskatchewan were established by the statutes creating those provinces. 
See footnote (6) to section 5, above. 

See also sections 3 to 5 of the Constitution Act, 1982, which prescribe democratic 
rights applicable to all provinces, and subitem 2(2) of the Schedule to that Act, which 
sets out the repeal of section 20 of the Manitoba Act, 1870. Section 20 of the Manitoba 
Act, 1870 has been replaced by section 5 of the Constitution Act, 1982. Section 20 read 
as follows: 

20. There shall be a Session of the Legislature once at least in every year, so that twelve months shall not 
intervene between the last sitting of the Legislature in one Session and its first sitting in the next Session. 
(43) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

89. Each of the Lieutenant Governors of Ontario, Quebec and Nova Scotia shall cause Writs to be issued for 
the First Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly thereof in such Form and by such Person as he thinks 
fit, and at such Time and addressed to such Returning Officer as the Governor General directs, and so that the 
First Election of Member of Assembly for any Electoral District or any Subdivision thereof shall be held at the 
same Time and at the same Places as the Election for a Member to serve in the House of Commons of Canada for 
that Electoral District.  


of the Governor General for the Queen and for a Secretary of State, of One Year for 
Two Years, and of the Province for Canada. 

VI. DISTRIBUTION OF LEGISLATIVE POWERS 
POWERS OF THE PARLIAMENT 

Legislative Authority of Parliament of Canada 

91. It shall be lawful for the Queen, by and with the Advice and Consent of the 
Senate and House of Commons, to make Laws for the Peace, Order, and good Government 
of Canada, in relation to all Matters not coming within the Classes of Subjects 
by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures of the Provinces; and for 
greater Certainty, but not so as to restrict the Generality of the foregoing Terms of 
this Section, it is hereby declared that (notwithstanding anything in this Act) the exclusive 
Legislative Authority of the Parliament of Canada extends to all Matters 
coming within the Classes of Subjects next hereinafter enumerated; that is to say, 
1. Repealed. (44) 
1A. The Public Debt and Property. (45) 

2. The Regulation of Trade and Commerce. 
2A. Unemployment insurance. (46) 

3. The raising of Money by any Mode or System of Taxation. 
4. The borrowing of Money on the Public Credit. 
(44) 
A new class 1 was added by the British North America (No. 2) Act, 1949, 
13 Geo. VI, c. 81 (U.K.). That Act and class 1 were repealed by the Constitution Act, 
1982. The matters referred to in class 1 are provided for in subsection 4(2) and Part V 
of the Constitution Act, 1982. As enacted, class 1 read as follows: 

1. The amendment from time to time of the Constitution of Canada, except as regards matters coming within 
the classes of subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures of the provinces, or as regards rights 
or privileges by this or any other Constitutional Act granted or secured to the Legislature or the Government of a 
province, or to any class of persons with respect to schools or as regards the use of the English or the French 
language or as regards the requirements that there shall be a session of the Parliament of Canada at least once 
each year, and that no House of Commons shall continue for more than five years from the day of the return of 
the Writs for choosing the House: provided, however, that a House of Commons may in time of real or apprehended 
war, invasion or insurrection be continued by the Parliament of Canada if such continuation is not opposed 
by the votes of more than one-third of the members of such House. 
(45) 
The original class 1 was re-numbered by the British North America (No. 2) Act, 
1949, 13 Geo. VI, c. 81 (U.K.), as class 1A. 

(46) 
Added by the Constitution Act, 1940, 3-4 Geo. VI, c. 36 (U.K.). 


5. 
Postal Service. 
6. 
The Census and Statistics. 
7. 
Militia, Military and Naval Service, and Defence. 
8. 
The fixing of and providing for the Salaries and Allowances of Civil and 
other Officers of the Government of Canada. 
9. 
Beacons, Buoys, Lighthouses, and Sable Island. 
10. 
Navigation and Shipping. 
11. 
Quarantine and the Establishment and Maintenance of Marine Hospitals. 
12. 
Sea Coast and Inland Fisheries. 
13. 
Ferries between a Province and any British or Foreign Country or between 
Two Provinces. 
14. 
Currency and Coinage. 
15. 
Banking, Incorporation of Banks, and the Issue of Paper Money. 
16. 
Savings Banks. 
17. 
Weights and Measures. 
18. 
Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes. 
19. 
Interest. 
20. 
Legal Tender. 
21. 
Bankruptcy and Insolvency. 
22. 
Patents of Invention and Discovery. 
23. 
Copyrights. 
24. 
Indians, and Lands reserved for the Indians. 
25. 
Naturalization and Aliens. 
26. 
Marriage and Divorce. 
 





27. 
The Criminal Law, except the Constitution of Courts of Criminal Jurisdiction, 
but including the Procedure in Criminal Matters. 
28. 
The Establishment, Maintenance, and Management of Penitentiaries. 
29. 
Such Classes of Subjects as are expressly excepted in the Enumeration of 
the Classes of Subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures 
of the Provinces. 
And any Matter coming within any of the Classes of Subjects enumerated in this 
Section shall not be deemed to come within the Class of Matters of a local or private 
Nature comprised in the Enumeration of the Classes of Subjects by this Act assigned 
exclusively to the Legislatures of the Provinces. (47) 

EXCLUSIVE POWERS OF PROVINCIAL LEGISLATURES 

Subjects of exclusive Provincial Legislation 

92. In each Province the Legislature may exclusively make Laws in relation to 
Matters coming within the Classes of Subjects next hereinafter enumerated; that is 
to say, 
1. 
Repealed. (48) 
2. 
Direct Taxation within the Province in order to the raising of a Revenue for 
Provincial Purposes. 
3. 
The borrowing of Money on the sole Credit of the Province. 
4. 
The Establishment and Tenure of Provincial Offices and the Appointment 
and Payment of Provincial Officers. 
5. 
The Management and Sale of the Public Lands belonging to the Province 
and of the Timber and Wood thereon. 
6. 
The Establishment, Maintenance, and Management of Public and Reforma-
tory Prisons in and for the Province. 
(47) 
Legislative authority has been conferred on Parliament by other Acts. For further 
details, see endnote 3. 

(48) 
Class 1 was repealed by the Constitution Act, 1982. As enacted, it read as follows: 

1. The Amendment from Time to Time, notwithstanding anything in this Act, of the Constitution of the 
Province, except as regards the Office of Lieutenant Governor. 
Section 45 of the Constitution Act, 1982 now authorizes legislatures to make laws 
amending the constitution of the province. Sections 38, 41, 42 and 43 of that Act authorize 
legislative assemblies to give their approval by resolution to certain other amendments 
to the Constitution of Canada. 
 


7. 
The Establishment, Maintenance, and Management of Hospitals, Asylums, 
Charities, and Eleemosynary Institutions in and for the Province, other than 
Marine Hospitals. 
8. 
Municipal Institutions in the Province. 
9. 
Shop, Saloon, Tavern, Auctioneer, and other Licences in order to the raising 
of a Revenue for Provincial, Local, or Municipal Purposes. 
10. 
Local Works and Undertakings other than such as are of the following 
Classes: 
(a) Lines of Steam or other Ships, Railways, Canals, Telegraphs, and other 
Works and Undertakings connecting the Province with any other or 
others of the Provinces, or extending beyond the Limits of the 
Province: 
(b) Lines of Steam Ships between the Province and any British or Foreign 
Country: 
(c) Such Works as, although wholly situate within the Province, are before 
or after their Execution declared by the Parliament of Canada to be for 
the general Advantage of Canada or for the Advantage of Two or more 
of the Provinces. 
11. 
The Incorporation of Companies with Provincial Objects. 
12. 
The Solemnization of Marriage in the Province. 
13. 
Property and Civil Rights in the Province. 
14. 
The Administration of Justice in the Province, including the Constitution, 
Maintenance, and Organization of Provincial Courts, both of Civil and of 
Criminal Jurisdiction, and including Procedure in Civil Matters in those 
Courts. 
15. 
The Imposition of Punishment by Fine, Penalty, or Imprisonment for enforcing 
any Law of the Province made in relation to any Matter coming within 
any of the Classes of Subjects enumerated in this Section. 
16. 
Generally all Matters of a merely local or private Nature in the Province. 
NON-RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES, FORESTRY RESOURCES AND ELECTRICAL ENERGY 

Laws respecting non-renewable natural resources, forestry resources and electrical energy 

92A. 
(1) In each province, the legislature may exclusively make laws in relation 
to 

(a) exploration for non-renewable natural resources in the province; 
 



(b) development, conservation and management of non-renewable natural re-
sources and forestry resources in the province, including laws in relation to the 
rate of primary production therefrom; and 
(c) development, conservation and management of sites and facilities in the 
province for the generation and production of electrical energy. 
Export from provinces of resources 

(2) In each province, the legislature may make laws in relation to the export from 
the province to another part of Canada of the primary production from non-renewable 
natural resources and forestry resources in the province and the production 
from facilities in the province for the generation of electrical energy, but such laws 
may not authorize or provide for discrimination in prices or in supplies exported to 
another part of Canada. 
Authority of Parliament 

(3) Nothing in subsection (2) derogates from the authority of Parliament to enact 
laws in relation to the matters referred to in that subsection and, where such a law of 
Parliament and a law of a province conflict, the law of Parliament prevails to the 
extent of the conflict. 
Taxation of resources 

(4) In each province, the legislature may make laws in relation to the raising of 
money by any mode or system of taxation in respect of 
(a) non-renewable natural resources and forestry resources in the province and 
the primary production therefrom, and 
(b) sites and facilities in the province for the generation of electrical energy and 
the production therefrom, 
whether or not such production is exported in whole or in part from the province, 
but such laws may not authorize or provide for taxation that differentiates between 
production exported to another part of Canada and production not exported from the 
province. 

“Primary production” 

(5) The expression “primary production” has the meaning assigned by the Sixth 
Schedule. 



Existing powers or rights 

(6) Nothing in subsections (1) to (5) derogates from any powers or rights that a 
legislature or government of a province had immediately before the coming into 
force of this section. (49) 
EDUCATION 

Legislation respecting Education 

93. In and for each Province the Legislature may exclusively make Laws in relation 
to Education, subject and according to the following Provisions: 
(1) 
Nothing in any such Law shall prejudicially affect any Right or Privilege 
with respect to Denominational Schools which any Class of Persons have by 
Law in the Province at the Union; 
(2) 
All the Powers, Privileges, and Duties at the Union by Law conferred and 
imposed in Upper Canada on the Separate Schools and School Trustees of 
the Queen’s Roman Catholic Subjects shall be and the same are hereby extended 
to the Dissentient Schools of the Queen’s Protestant and Roman 
Catholic Subjects in Quebec; 
(3) 
Where in any Province a System of Separate or Dissentient Schools exists 
by Law at the Union or is thereafter established by the Legislature of the 
Province, an Appeal shall lie to the Governor General in Council from any 
Act or Decision of any Provincial Authority affecting any Right or Privilege 
of the Protestant or Roman Catholic Minority of the Queen’s Subjects in relation 
to Education; 
(4) 
In case any such Provincial Law as from Time to Time seems to the Governor 
General in Council requisite for the due Execution of the Provisions of 
this Section is not made, or in case any Decision of the Governor General in 
Council on any Appeal under this Section is not duly executed by the proper 
Provincial Authority in that Behalf, then and in every such Case, and as far 
only as the Circumstances of each Case require, the Parliament of Canada 
may make remedial Laws for the due Execution of the Provisions of this 
Section and of any Decision of the Governor General in Council under this 
Section. (50) 
(49) 
Added by section 50 of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

(50) 
Alternative provisions have been enacted for four provinces. For further details, 
see endnote 4. 


Quebec 

93A. Paragraphs (1) to (4) of section 93 do not apply to Quebec. (51) 

UNIFORMITY OF LAWS IN ONTARIO, NOVA SCOTIA, AND NEW BRUNSWICK 

Legislation for Uniformity of Laws in Three Provinces 

94. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Parliament of Canada may make 
Provision for the Uniformity of all or any of the Laws relative to Property and Civil 
Rights in Ontario, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick, and of the Procedure of all or 
any of the Courts in those Three Provinces, and from and after the passing of any 
Act in that Behalf the Power of the Parliament of Canada to make Laws in relation 
to any Matter comprised in any such Act shall, notwithstanding anything in this Act, 
be unrestricted; but any Act of the Parliament of Canada making Provision for such 
Uniformity shall not have effect in any Province unless and until it is adopted and 
enacted as Law by the Legislature thereof. 
OLD AGE PENSIONS 

Legislation respecting old age pensions and supplementary benefits 

94A. The Parliament of Canada may make laws in relation to old age pensions 
and supplementary benefits, including survivors’ and disability benefits irrespective 
of age, but no such law shall affect the operation of any law present or future of a 
provincial legislature in relation to any such matter. (52) 

AGRICULTURE AND IMMIGRATION 

Concurrent Powers of Legislation respecting Agriculture, etc. 

95. In each Province the Legislature may make Laws in relation to Agriculture in 
the Province, and to Immigration into the Province; and it is hereby declared that 
the Parliament of Canada may from Time to Time make Laws in relation to Agriculture 
in all or any of the Provinces, and to Immigration into all or any of the 
Provinces; and any Law of the Legislature of a Province relative to Agriculture or to 
Immigration shall have effect in and for the Province as long and as far only as it is 
not repugnant to any Act of the Parliament of Canada. 
(51) 
Added by the Constitution Amendment, 1997 (Quebec) (see SI/97-141). 

(52) 
Amended by the Constitution Act, 1964, 12-13 Eliz. II, c. 73 (U.K.). As originally 
enacted by the British North America Act, 1951, 14-15 Geo. VI, c. 32 (U.K.), which was 
repealed by the Constitution Act, 1982, section 94A read as follows: 

94A. It is hereby declared that the Parliament of Canada may from time to time make laws in relation to old 
age pensions in Canada, but no law made by the Parliament of Canada in relation to old age pensions shall affect 
the operation of any law present or future of a Provincial Legislature in relation to old age pensions. 


VII. JUDICATURE 
Appointment of Judges 

96. The Governor General shall appoint the Judges of the Superior, District, and 
County Courts in each Province, except those of the Courts of Probate in Nova Scotia 
and New Brunswick. 
Selection of Judges in Ontario, etc. 

97. Until the Laws relative to Property and Civil Rights in Ontario, Nova Scotia, 
and New Brunswick, and the Procedure of the Courts in those Provinces, are made 
uniform, the Judges of the Courts of those Provinces appointed by the Governor 
General shall be selected from the respective Bars of those Provinces. 
Selection of Judges in Quebec 

98. The Judges of the Courts of Quebec shall be selected from the Bar of that 
Province. 
Tenure of office of Judges 

99. (1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section, the judges of the superior courts 
shall hold office during good behaviour, but shall be removable by the Governor 
General on address of the Senate and House of Commons. 
Termination at age 75 

(2) A judge of a superior court, whether appointed before or after the coming in-
to force of this section, shall cease to hold office upon attaining the age of seventyfive 
years, or upon the coming into force of this section if at that time he has already 
attained that age. (53) 
Salaries, etc., of Judges 

100. The Salaries, Allowances, and Pensions of the Judges of the Superior, District, 
and County Courts (except the Courts of Probate in Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick), and of the Admiralty Courts in Cases where the Judges thereof are for 
the Time being paid by Salary, shall be fixed and provided by the Parliament of 
Canada. (54) 
(53) 
Amended by the Constitution Act, 1960, 9 Eliz. II, c. 2 (U.K.), which came into 
force on March 1, 1961. The original section read as follows: 

99. The Judges of the Superior Courts shall hold Office during good Behaviour, but shall be removable by 
the Governor General on Address of the Senate and House of Commons. 
(54) 
Now provided for in the Judges Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. J-1. 


General Court of Appeal, etc. 

101. The Parliament of Canada may, notwithstanding anything in this Act, from 
Time to Time provide for the Constitution, Maintenance, and Organization of a 
General Court of Appeal for Canada, and for the Establishment of any additional 
Courts for the better Administration of the Laws of Canada. (55) 
VIII. REVENUES; DEBTS; ASSETS; TAXATION 
Creation of Consolidated Revenue Fund 

102. All Duties and Revenues over which the respective Legislatures of Canada, 
Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick before and at the Union had and have Power of 
Appropriation, except such Portions thereof as are by this Act reserved to the respective 
Legislatures of the Provinces, or are raised by them in accordance with the 
special Powers conferred on them by this Act, shall form One Consolidated Revenue 
Fund, to be appropriated for the Public Service of Canada in the Manner and 
subject to the Charges in this Act provided. 
Expenses of Collection, etc. 

103. The Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada shall be permanently charged 
with the Costs, Charges, and Expenses incident to the Collection, Management, and 
Receipt thereof, and the same shall form the First Charge thereon, subject to be reviewed 
and audited in such Manner as shall be ordered by the Governor General in 
Council until the Parliament otherwise provides. 
Interest of Provincial Public Debts 

104. The annual Interest of the Public Debts of the several Provinces of Canada, 
Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick at the Union shall form the Second Charge on the 
Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada. 
Salary of Governor General 

105. Unless altered by the Parliament of Canada, the Salary of the Governor 
General shall be Ten thousand Pounds Sterling Money of the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Ireland, payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of 
Canada, and the same shall form the Third Charge thereon. (56) 
(55) 
See the Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-26, the Federal Courts Act, 

R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 and the Tax Court of Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-2. 
(56) 
Now covered by the Governor General’s Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. G-9.  


Appropriation from Time to Time 

106. Subject to the several Payments by this Act charged on the Consolidated 
Revenue Fund of Canada, the same shall be appropriated by the Parliament of 
Canada for the Public Service. 
Transfer of Stocks, etc. 

107. All Stocks, Cash, Banker’s Balances, and Securities for Money belonging 
to each Province at the Time of the Union, except as in this Act mentioned, shall be 
the Property of Canada, and shall be taken in Reduction of the Amount of the respective 
Debts of the Provinces at the Union. 
Transfer of Property in Schedule 

108. The Public Works and Property of each Province, enumerated in the Third 
Schedule to this Act, shall be the Property of Canada. 
Property in Lands, Mines, etc. 

109. All Lands, Mines, Minerals, and Royalties belonging to the several 
Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick at the Union, and all Sums 
then due or payable for such Lands, Mines, Minerals, or Royalties, shall belong to 
the several Provinces of Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick in 
which the same are situate or arise, subject to any Trusts existing in respect thereof, 
and to any Interest other than that of the Province in the same. (57) 
Assets connected with Provincial Debts 

110. All Assets connected with such Portions of the Public Debt of each 
Province as are assumed by that Province shall belong to that Province. 
Canada to be liable for Provincial Debts 

111. Canada shall be liable for the Debts and Liabilities of each Province existing 
at the Union. 
(57) 
Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan were placed in the same position as the original 
provinces by the Constitution Act, 1930, 20-21 Geo. V, c. 26 (U.K.). 

These matters were dealt with in respect of British Columbia by the British 
Columbia Terms of Union and also in part by the Constitution Act, 1930. 

Newfoundland was also placed in the same position by the Newfoundland Act, 
12-13 Geo. V1, c. 22 (U.K.). 

With respect to Prince Edward Island, see the Schedule to the Prince Edward Island 
Terms of Union. 


Debts of Ontario and Quebec 

112. Ontario and Quebec conjointly shall be liable to Canada for the Amount (if 
any) by which the Debt of the Province of Canada exceeds at the Union Sixty-two 
million five hundred thousand Dollars, and shall be charged with Interest at the Rate 
of Five per Centum per Annum thereon. 
Assets of Ontario and Quebec 

113. The Assets enumerated in the Fourth Schedule to this Act belonging at the 
Union to the Province of Canada shall be the Property of Ontario and Quebec conjointly. 
Debt of Nova Scotia 

114. Nova Scotia shall be liable to Canada for the Amount (if any) by which its 
Public Debt exceeds at the Union Eight million Dollars, and shall be charged with 
Interest at the Rate of Five per Centum per Annum thereon. (58) 
Debt of New Brunswick 

115. New Brunswick shall be liable to Canada for the Amount (if any) by which 
its Public Debt exceeds at the Union Seven million Dollars, and shall be charged 
with Interest at the Rate of Five per Centum per Annum thereon. 
Payment of interest to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 

116. In case the Public Debts of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick do not at the 
Union amount to Eight million and Seven million Dollars respectively, they shall 
respectively receive by half-yearly Payments in advance from the Government of 
Canada Interest at Five per Centum per Annum on the Difference between the actual 
Amounts of their respective Debts and such stipulated Amounts. 
Provincial Public Property 

117. The several Provinces shall retain all their respective Public Property not 
otherwise disposed of in this Act, subject to the Right of Canada to assume any 
Lands or Public Property required for Fortifications or for the Defence of the Country. 
118. Repealed. (59) 
(58) 
The obligations imposed by sections 114, 115 and 116, and similar obligations un-
der the instruments creating or admitting other provinces, are now to be found in the 
Provincial Subsidies Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-26. 

(59) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1950, 14 Geo. VI, c. 6 (U.K.). For further 
details, see endnote 5.


Further Grant to New Brunswick 

119. New Brunswick shall receive by half-yearly Payments in advance from 
Canada for the Period of Ten Years from the Union an additional Allowance of Sixty-
three thousand Dollars per Annum; but as long as the Public Debt of that 
Province remains under Seven million Dollars, a Deduction equal to the Interest at 
Five per Centum per Annum on such Deficiency shall be made from that Allowance 
of Sixty-three thousand Dollars. (60) 
Form of Payments 

120. All Payments to be made under this Act, or in discharge of Liabilities created 
under any Act of the Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick respectively, 
and assumed by Canada, shall, until the Parliament of Canada otherwise 
directs, be made in such Form and Manner as may from Time to Time be ordered 
by the Governor General in Council. 
Canadian Manufactures, etc. 

121. All Articles of the Growth, Produce, or Manufacture of any one of the 
Provinces shall, from and after the Union, be admitted free into each of the other 
Provinces. 
Continuance of Customs and Excise Laws 

122. The Customs and Excise Laws of each Province shall, subject to the Provisions 
of this Act, continue in force until altered by the Parliament of Canada. (61) 
Exportation and Importation as between Two Provinces 

123. Where Customs Duties are, at the Union, leviable on any Goods, Wares, or 
Merchandises in any Two Provinces, those Goods, Wares, and Merchandises may, 
from and after the Union, be imported from one of those Provinces into the other of 
them on Proof of Payment of the Customs Duty leviable thereon in the Province of 
Exportation, and on Payment of such further Amount (if any) of Customs Duty as is 
leviable thereon in the Province of Importation. (62) 
Lumber Dues in New Brunswick 

124. Nothing in this Act shall affect the Right of New Brunswick to levy the 
Lumber Dues provided in Chapter Fifteen of Title Three of the Revised Statutes of 
(60) 
Spent. 

(61) 
Spent. Now covered by the Customs Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.), the Customs 
Tariff, S.C. 1997, c. 36, the Excise Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-14, the Excise Act, 2001, 

S.C. 2002, c. 22 and the Excise Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-15. 
(62) 
Spent. 


New Brunswick, or in any Act amending that Act before or after the Union, and not 
increasing the Amount of such Dues; but the Lumber of any of the Provinces other 
than New Brunswick shall not be subject to such Dues. (63) 

Exemption of Public Lands, etc. 

125. No Lands or Property belonging to Canada or any Province shall be liable 
to Taxation. 
Provincial Consolidated Revenue Fund 

126. Such Portions of the Duties and Revenues over which the respective Legislatures 
of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick had before the Union Power of 
Appropriation as are by this Act reserved to the respective Governments or Legislatures 
of the Provinces, and all Duties and Revenues raised by them in accordance 
with the special Powers conferred upon them by this Act, shall in each Province 
form One Consolidated Revenue Fund to be appropriated for the Public Service of 
the Province. 
IX. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
GENERAL 
127. Repealed. (64) 
Oath of Allegiance, etc. 

128. Every Member of the Senate or House of Commons of Canada shall before 
taking his Seat therein take and subscribe before the Governor General or some Person 
authorized by him, and every Member of a Legislative Council or Legislative 
Assembly of any Province shall before taking his Seat therein take and subscribe 
before the Lieutenant Governor of the Province or some Person authorized by him, 
the Oath of Allegiance contained in the Fifth Schedule to this Act; and every Member 
of the Senate of Canada and every Member of the Legislative Council of Que-
bec shall also, before taking his Seat therein, take and subscribe before the Gover(
63) 
These dues were repealed in 1873 by 36 Vict., c. 16 (N.B.). Also, see An Act respecting 
the Export Duties imposed on Lumber, etc. (1873) 36 Vict., c. 41 (Canada), and section 
2 of the Provincial Subsidies Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-26. 

(64) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

127. If any Person being at the passing of this Act a Member of the Legislative Council of Canada, Nova 
Scotia, or New Brunswick, to whom a Place in the Senate is offered, does not within Thirty Days thereafter, by 
Writing under his Hand addressed to the Governor General of the Province of Canada or to the Lieutenant Governor 
of Nova Scotia or New Brunswick (as the Case may be), accept the same, he shall be deemed to have declined 
the same; and any Person who, being at the passing of this Act a Member of the Legislative Council of 
Nova Scotia or New Brunswick, accepts a Place in the Senate shall thereby vacate his Seat in such Legislative 
Council. 


nor General, or some Person authorized by him, the Declaration of Qualification 
contained in the same Schedule. 

Continuance of existing Laws, Courts, Officers, etc. 

129. Except as otherwise provided by this Act, all Laws in force in Canada, Nova 
Scotia, or New Brunswick at the Union, and all Courts of Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction, 
and all legal Commissions, Powers, and Authorities, and all Officers, Judicial, 
Administrative, and Ministerial, existing therein at the Union, shall continue 
in Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick respectively, as if the Union 
had not been made; subject nevertheless (except with respect to such as are enacted 
by or exist under Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain or of the Parliament of the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,) to be repealed, abolished, or altered 
by the Parliament of Canada, or by the Legislature of the respective Province, according 
to the Authority of the Parliament or of that Legislature under this Act. (65) 
Transfer of Officers to Canada 

130. Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, all Officers of the several 
Provinces having Duties to discharge in relation to Matters other than those coming 
within the Classes of Subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures 
of the Provinces shall be Officers of Canada, and shall continue to discharge 
the Duties of their respective Offices under the same Liabilities, Responsibilities, 
and Penalties as if the Union had not been made. (66) 
Appointment of new Officers 

131. Until the Parliament of Canada otherwise provides, the Governor General in 
Council may from Time to Time appoint such Officers as the Governor General in 
Council deems necessary or proper for the effectual Execution of this Act. 
Treaty Obligations 

132. The Parliament and Government of Canada shall have all Powers necessary 
or proper for performing the Obligations of Canada or of any Province thereof, as 
Part of the British Empire, towards Foreign Countries, arising under Treaties between 
the Empire and such Foreign Countries. 
(65) 
The restriction against altering or repealing laws enacted by or existing under 
statutes of the United Kingdom was removed by the Statute of Westminster, 1931, 
22 Geo. V, c. 4 (U.K.), except in respect of certain constitutional documents. Comprehensive 
procedures for amending enactments forming part of the Constitution of 
Canada were provided by Part V of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

(66) 
Spent. 

Use of English and French Languages 

133. Either the English or the French Language may be used by any Person in 
the Debates of the Houses of the Parliament of Canada and of the Houses of the 
Legislature of Quebec; and both those Languages shall be used in the respective 
Records and Journals of those Houses; and either of those Languages may be used 
by any Person or in any Pleading or Process in or issuing from any Court of Canada 
established under this Act, and in or from all or any of the Courts of Quebec. 
The Acts of the Parliament of Canada and of the Legislature of Quebec shall be 
printed and published in both those Languages. (67) 

(67) 
A similar provision was enacted for Manitoba by section 23 of the Manitoba Act, 
1870, 33 Vict., c. 3 (confirmed by the Constitution Act, 1871, 34-35 Vict., c. 28 (U.K.)). 
Section 23 reads as follows: 

23. Either the English or the French language may be used by any person in the debates of the Houses of the 
Legislature, and both these languages shall be used in the respective Records and Journals of those Houses; and 
either of those languages may be used by any person, or in any Pleading or Process, in or issuing from any Court 
of Canada established under the British North America Act, 1867, or in or from all or any of the Courts of the 
Province. The Acts of the Legislature shall be printed and published in both those languages. 
Sections 17 to 19 of the Constitution Act, 1982 restate the language rights set out in 
section 133 in respect of Parliament and the courts established under the Constitution 
Act, 1867, and also guarantee those rights in respect of the legislature of New 
Brunswick and the courts of that province. 

Sections 16, 20, 21 and 23 of the Constitution Act, 1982 recognize additional language 
rights in respect of the English and French languages. Section 22 preserves language 
rights and privileges of languages other than English and French.

ONTARIO AND QUEBEC 

Appointment of Executive Officers for Ontario and Quebec 

134. Until the Legislature of Ontario or of Quebec otherwise provides, the Lieutenant 
Governors of Ontario and Quebec may each appoint under the Great Seal of 
the Province the following Officers, to hold Office during Pleasure, that is to say, — 
the Attorney General, the Secretary and Registrar of the Province, the Treasurer of 
the Province, the Commissioner of Crown Lands, and the Commissioner of Agriculture 
and Public Works, and in the Case of Quebec the Solicitor General, and may, 
by Order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, from Time to Time prescribe the 
Duties of those Officers, and of the several Departments over which they shall preside 
or to which they shall belong, and of the Officers and Clerks thereof, and may 
also appoint other and additional Officers to hold Office during Pleasure, and may 
from Time to Time prescribe the Duties of those Officers, and of the several Departments 
over which they shall preside or to which they shall belong, and of the Officers 
and Clerks thereof. (68) 
Powers, Duties, etc. of Executive Officers 

135. Until the Legislature of Ontario or Quebec otherwise provides, all Rights, 
Powers, Duties, Functions, Responsibilities, or Authorities at the passing of this Act 
vested in or imposed on the Attorney General, Solicitor General, Secretary and Registrar 
of the Province of Canada, Minister of Finance, Commissioner of Crown 
Lands, Commissioner of Public Works, and Minister of Agriculture and Receiver 
General, by any Law, Statute, or Ordinance of Upper Canada, Lower Canada, or 
Canada, and not repugnant to this Act, shall be vested in or imposed on any Officer 
to be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor for the Discharge of the same or any of 
them; and the Commissioner of Agriculture and Public Works shall perform the Duties 
and Functions of the Office of Minister of Agriculture at the passing of this Act 
imposed by the Law of the Province of Canada, as well as those of the Commission-
er of Public Works. (69) 
Great Seals 

136. Until altered by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the Great Seals of Ontario 
and Quebec respectively shall be the same, or of the same Design, as those 
used in the Provinces of Upper Canada and Lower Canada respectively before their 
Union as the Province of Canada. 
(68) 
Spent. Now covered in Ontario by the Executive Council Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.25 
and in Quebec by the Executive Power Act, R.S.Q. c. E-18. 

(69) 
Probably spent. 


Construction of temporary Acts 

137. The words “and from thence to the End of the then next ensuing Session of 
the Legislature,” or Words to the same Effect, used in any temporary Act of the 
Province of Canada not expired before the Union, shall be construed to extend and 
apply to the next Session of the Parliament of Canada if the Subject Matter of the 
Act is within the Powers of the same as defined by this Act, or to the next Sessions 
of the Legislatures of Ontario and Quebec respectively if the Subject Matter of the 
Act is within the Powers of the same as defined by this Act. 
As to Errors in Names 

138. From and after the Union the Use of the Words “Upper Canada” instead of 
“Ontario,” or “Lower Canada” instead of “Quebec,” in any Deed, Writ, Process, 
Pleading, Document, Matter, or Thing shall not invalidate the same. 
As to issue of Proclamations before Union, to commence after Union 

139. Any Proclamation under the Great Seal of the Province of Canada issued 
before the Union to take effect at a Time which is subsequent to the Union, whether 
relating to that Province, or to Upper Canada, or to Lower Canada, and the several 
Matters and Things therein proclaimed, shall be and continue of like Force and Effect 
as if the Union had not been made. (70) 
As to issue of Proclamations after Union 

140. Any Proclamation which is authorized by any Act of the Legislature of the 
Province of Canada to be issued under the Great Seal of the Province of Canada, 
whether relating to that Province, or to Upper Canada, or to Lower Canada, and 
which is not issued before the Union, may be issued by the Lieutenant Governor of 
Ontario or of Quebec, as its Subject Matter requires, under the Great Seal thereof; 
and from and after the Issue of such Proclamation the same and the several Matters 
and Things therein proclaimed shall be and continue of the like Force and Effect in 
Ontario or Quebec as if the Union had not been made. (71) 
Penitentiary 

141. The Penitentiary of the Province of Canada shall, until the Parliament of 
Canada otherwise provides, be and continue the Penitentiary of Ontario and of Que-
bec. (72) 
(70) 
Probably spent. 

(71) 
Probably spent. 

(72) 
Spent. Penitentiaries are now provided for by the Corrections and Conditional Release 
Act, S.C. 1992, c. 20. 
 


Arbitration respecting Debts, etc. 

142. The Division and Adjustment of the Debts, Credits, Liabilities, Properties, 
and Assets of Upper Canada and Lower Canada shall be referred to the Arbitrament 
of Three Arbitrators, One chosen by the Government of Ontario, One by the Government 
of Quebec, and One by the Government of Canada; and the Selection of the 
Arbitrators shall not be made until the Parliament of Canada and the Legislatures of 
Ontario and Quebec have met; and the Arbitrator chosen by the Government of 
Canada shall not be a Resident either in Ontario or in Quebec. (73) 
Division of Records 

143. The Governor General in Council may from Time to Time order that such 
and so many of the Records, Books, and Documents of the Province of Canada as 
he thinks fit shall be appropriated and delivered either to Ontario or to Quebec, and 
the same shall thenceforth be the Property of that Province; and any Copy thereof or 
Extract therefrom, duly certified by the Officer having charge of the Original thereof, 
shall be admitted as Evidence. (74) 
Constitution of Townships in Quebec 

144. The Lieutenant Governor of Quebec may from Time to Time, by Proclamation 
under the Great Seal of the Province, to take effect from a Day to be appointed 
therein, constitute Townships in those Parts of the Province of Quebec in which 
Townships are not then already constituted, and fix the Metes and Bounds thereof. 
X. INTERCOLONIAL RAILWAY 
145. Repealed. (75) 
(73) 
Spent. See pages (xi) and (xii) of the Public Accounts, 1902-1903. 

(74) 
Probably spent. Two orders were made under this section on January 24, 1868. 

(75) 
Repealed by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14, (U.K.). The section 
read as follows: 

145. Inasmuch as the Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick have joined in a Declaration 
that the Construction of the Intercolonial Railway is essential to the Consolidation of the Union of British North 
America, and to the Assent thereto of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and have consequently agreed that Provision 
should be made for its immediate Construction by the Government of Canada; Therefore, in order to give 
effect to that Agreement, it shall be the Duty of the Government and Parliament of Canada to provide for the 
Commencement, within Six Months after the Union, of a Railway connecting the River St. Lawrence with the 
City of Halifax in Nova Scotia, and for the Construction thereof without Intermission, and the Completion thereof 
with all practicable Speed. 




XI. ADMISSION OF OTHER COLONIES 
Power to admit Newfoundland, etc., into the Union 

146. It shall be lawful for the Queen, by and with the Advice of Her Majesty’s 
Most Honourable Privy Council, on Addresses from the Houses of the Parliament of 
Canada, and from the Houses of the respective Legislatures of the Colonies or 
Provinces of Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, and British Columbia, to admit 
those Colonies or Provinces, or any of them, into the Union, and on Address from 
the Houses of the Parliament of Canada to admit Rupert’s Land and the North-western 
Territory, or either of them, into the Union, on such Terms and Conditions in 
each Case as are in the Addresses expressed and as the Queen thinks fit to approve, 
subject to the Provisions of this Act; and the Provisions of any Order in Council in 
that Behalf shall have effect as if they had been enacted by the Parliament of the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. (76) 
As to Representation of Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island in Senate 

147. In case of the Admission of Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island, or either 
of them, each shall be entitled to a Representation in the Senate of Canada of 
Four Members, and (notwithstanding anything in this Act) in case of the Admission 
of Newfoundland the normal Number of Senators shall be Seventy-six and their 
maximum Number shall be Eighty-two; but Prince Edward Island when admitted 
shall be deemed to be comprised in the third of the Three Divisions into which 
Canada is, in relation to the Constitution of the Senate, divided by this Act, and accordingly, 
after the Admission of Prince Edward Island, whether Newfoundland is 
admitted or not, the Representation of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in the Senate 
shall, as Vacancies occur, be reduced from Twelve to Ten Members respectively, 
and the Representation of each of those Provinces shall not be increased at any 
Time beyond Ten, except under the Provisions of this Act for the Appointment of 
Three or Six additional Senators under the Direction of the Queen. (77) 
(76) 
All territories mentioned in section 146 are now part of Canada. See footnote (6) to 
section 5, above. 

(77) 
Spent. See footnotes (11), (12), (15), (16) and (17) to sections 21, 22, 26, 27 and 28, 
above. 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE (78) 
ELECTORAL DISTRICTS OF ONTARIO 
A. EXISTING ELECTORAL DIVISIONS. 


Counties 

1. 
Prescott. 
2. 
Glengarry. 
3. 
Stormont. 
4. 
Dundas. 
5. 
Russell. 
6. 
Carleton. 
7. 
Prince Edward. 
8. 
Halton. 
9. 
Essex. 
Ridings of Counties 

10. 
North Riding of Lanark. 
11. 
South Riding of Lanark. 
12. 
North Riding of Leeds and North Riding of Grenville. 
13. 
South Riding of Leeds. 
14. 
South Riding of Grenville. 
15. 
East Riding of Northumberland. 
16. 
West Riding of Northumberland (excepting therefrom the Township of 
South Monaghan). 
17. 
East Riding of Durham. 
18. 
West Riding of Durham. 
19. 
North Riding of Ontario. 
20. 
South Riding of Ontario. 
21. 
East Riding of York. 
22. 
West Riding of York. 
23. 
North Riding of York. 
24. 
North Riding of Wentworth. 
25. 
South Riding of Wentworth. 
26. 
East Riding of Elgin. 
27. 
West Riding of Elgin. 
28. 
North Riding of Waterloo. 
29. 
South Riding of Waterloo. 
30. 
North Riding of Brant. 
31. 
South Riding of Brant. 
(78) 
Spent. See Representation Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. R.26. 


32. 
North Riding of Oxford. 
33. 
South Riding of Oxford. 
34. 
East Riding of Middlesex. 
Cities, Parts of Cities, and Towns 

35. 
West Toronto. 
36. 
East Toronto. 
37. 
Hamilton. 
38. 
Ottawa. 
39. 
Kingston. 
40. 
London. 
41. 
Town of Brockville, with the Township of Elizabethtown thereto attached. 
42. 
Town of Niagara, with the Township of Niagara thereto attached. 
43. 
Town of Cornwall, with the Township of Cornwall thereto attached. 
B. NEW ELECTORAL DIVISIONS 
44. 
The Provisional Judicial District of Algoma. 
The County of BRUCE, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
North and South Ridings: 

45. 
The North Riding of Bruce to consist of the Townships of Bury, Lindsay, 
Eastnor, Albermarle, Amable, Arran, Bruce, Elderslie, and Saugeen, and the 
Village of Southampton. 
46. 
The South Riding of Bruce to consist of the Townships of Kincardine (including 
the Village of Kincardine), Greenock, Brant, Huron, Kinloss, Culross, 
and Carrick. 
The County of HURON, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
North and South Ridings: 

47. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Ashfield, Wawanosh, 
Turnberry, Howick, Morris, Grey, Colborne, Hullett, including the Village 
of Clinton, and McKillop. 
48. 
The South Riding to consist of the Town of Goderich and the Townships of 
Goderich, Tuckersmith, Stanley, Hay, Usborne, and Stephen. 
The County of MIDDLESEX, divided into three Ridings, to be called respectively 
the North, West, and East Ridings: 

49. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of McGillivray and Biddulph 
(taken from the County of Huron), and Williams East, Williams West, Adelaide, 
and Lobo. 
50. 
The West Riding to consist of the Townships of Delaware, Carradoc, Metcalfe, 
Mosa and Ekfrid, and the Village of Strathroy. 


[The East Riding to consist of the Townships now embraced therein, and be 
bounded as it is at present.] 

51. 
The County of LAMBTON to consist of the Townships of Bosanquet, Warwick, 
Plympton, Sarnia, Moore, Enniskillen, and Brooke, and the Town of 
Sarnia. 
52. 
The County of KENT to consist of the Townships of Chatham, Dover, East 
Tilbury, Romney, Raleigh, and Harwich, and the Town of Chatham. 
53. 
The County of BOTHWELL to consist of the Townships of Sombra, Dawn, and 
Euphemia (taken from the County of Lambton), and the Townships of Zone, 
Camden with the Gore thereof, Orford, and Howard (taken from the County 
of Kent). 
The County of GREY divided into Two Ridings to be called respectively the South 
and North Ridings: 

54. 
The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Bentinck, Glenelg, 
Artemesia, Osprey, Normanby, Egremont, Proton, and Melancthon. 
55. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Collingwood, Euphrasia, 
Holland, Saint-Vincent, Sydenham, Sullivan, Derby, and Keppel, Sarawak 
and Brooke, and the Town of Owen Sound. 
The County of PERTH divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
South and North Ridings: 

56. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Wallace, Elma, Logan, Ellice, 
Mornington, and North Easthope, and the Town of Stratford. 
57. 
The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Blanchard, Downie, South 
Easthope, Fullarton, Hibbert, and the Villages of Mitchell and Ste. Marys. 
The County of WELLINGTON divided into Three Ridings to be called respectively 
North, South and Centre Ridings: 

58. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Amaranth, Arthur, Luther, 
Minto, Maryborough, Peel, and the Village of Mount Forest. 
59. 
The Centre Riding to consist of the Townships of Garafraxa, Erin, Eramosa, 
Nichol, and Pilkington, and the Villages of Fergus and Elora. 
60. 
The South Riding to consist of the Town of Guelph, and the Townships of 
Guelph and Puslinch. 
The County of NORFOLK, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
South and North Ridings: 

61. 
The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Charlotteville, Houghton, 
Walsingham, and Woodhouse, and with the Gore thereof. 
62. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Middleton, Townsend, and 
Windham, and the Town of Simcoe. 


63. 
The County of HALDIMAND to consist of the Townships of Oneida, Seneca, 
Cayuga North, Cayuga South, Raynham, Walpole, and Dunn. 
64. 
The County of MONCK to consist of the Townships of Canborough and 
Moulton, and Sherbrooke, and the Village of Dunnville (taken from the 
County of Haldimand), the Townships of Caister and Gainsborough (taken 
from the County of Lincoln), and the Townships of Pelham and Wainfleet 
(taken from the County of Welland). 
65. 
The County of LINCOLN to consist of the Townships of Clinton, Grantham, 
Grimsby, and Louth, and the Town of St. Catherines. 
66. 
The County of WELLAND to consist of the Townships of Bertie, Crowland, 
Humberstone, Stamford, Thorold, and Willoughby, and the Villages of 
Chippewa, Clifton, Fort Erie, Thorold, and Welland. 
67. 
The County of PEEL to consist of the Townships of Chinguacousy, Toronto, 
and the Gore of Toronto, and the Villages of Brampton and Streetsville. 
68. 
The County of CARDWELL to consist of the Townships of Albion and Cale-
don (taken from the County of Peel), and the Townships of Adjala and 
Mono (taken from the County of Simcoe). 
The County of SIMCOE, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
South and North Ridings: 

69. 
The South Riding to consist of the Townships of West Gwillimbury, 
Tecumseth, Innisfil, Essa, Tosorontio, Mulmur, and the Village of Bradford. 
70. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Nottawasaga, Sunnidale, 
Vespra, Flos, Oro, Medonte, Orillia and Matchedash, Tiny and Tay, Balaklava 
and Robinson, and the Towns of Barrie and Collingwood. 
The County of VICTORIA, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
South and North Ridings: 

71. 
The South Riding to consist of the Townships of Ops, Mariposa, Emily, 
Verulam, and the Town of Lindsay. 
72. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Anson, Bexley, Carden, 
Dalton, Digby, Eldon, Fenelon, Hindon, Laxton, Lutterworth, Macaulay and 
Draper, Sommerville, and Morrison, Muskoka, Monck and Watt (taken from 
the County of Simcoe), and any other surveyed Townships lying to the 
North of the said North Riding. 
The County of PETERBOROUGH, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively 
the West and East Ridings: 

73. 
The West Riding to consist of the Townships of South Monaghan (taken 
from the County of Northumberland), North Monaghan, Smith, and Ennismore, 
and the Town of Peterborough. 
74. 
The East Riding to consist of the Townships of Asphodel, Belmont and 
Methuen, Douro, Dummer, Galway, Harvey, Minden, Stanhope and Dysart, 


Otonabee, and Snowden, and the Village of Ashburnham, and any other surveyed 
Townships lying to the North of the said East Riding. 

The County of HASTINGS, divided into Three Ridings, to be called respectively the 
West, East, and North Ridings: 

75. 
The West Riding to consist of the Town of Belleville, the Township of Sydney, 
and the Village of Trenton. 
76. 
The East Riding to consist of the Townships of Thurlow, Tyendinaga, and 
Hungerford. 
77. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Rawdon, Huntingdon, 
Madoc, Elzevir, Tudor, Marmora, and Lake, and the Village of Stirling, and 
any other surveyed Townships lying to the North of the said North Riding. 
78. 
The County of LENNOX to consist of the Townships of Richmond, Adolphustown, 
North Fredericksburg, South Fredericksburg, Ernest Town, and 
Amherst Island, and the Village of Napanee. 
79. 
The County of ADDINGTON to consist of the Townships of Camden, Portland, 
Sheffield, Hinchinbrooke, Kaladar, Kennebec, Olden, Oso, Anglesea, Barrie, 
Clarendon, Palmerston, Effingham, Abinger, Miller, Canonto, Denbigh, 
Loughborough, and Bedford. 
80. 
The County of FRONTENAC to consist of the Townships of Kingston, Wolfe 
Island, Pittsburg and Howe Island, and Storrington. 
The County of RENFREW, divided into Two Ridings, to be called respectively the 
South and North Ridings: 

81. 
The South Riding to consist of the Townships of McNab, Bagot, Blithfield, 
Brougham, Horton, Admaston, Grattan, Matawatchan, Griffith, Lyndoch, 
Raglan, Radcliffe, Brudenell, Sebastopol, and the Villages of Arnprior and 
Renfrew. 
82. 
The North Riding to consist of the Townships of Ross, Bromley, Westmeath, 
Stafford, Pembroke, Wilberforce, Alice, Petawawa, Buchanan, South 
Algona, North Algona, Fraser, McKay, Wylie, Rolph, Head, Maria, Clara, 
Haggerty, Sherwood, Burns, and Richards, and any other surveyed Townships 
lying North-westerly of the said North Riding. 
Every Town and incorporated Village existing at the Union, not especially mentioned 
in this Schedule, is to be taken as Part of the County or Riding within which 
it is locally situate.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 

ELECTORAL DISTRICTS OF QUEBEC SPECIALLY FIXED 

COUNTIES OF — 

Pontiac. 
Ottawa. 
Argenteuil. 
Huntingdon. 
Missisquoi. 
Brome. 
Shefford. 
Stanstead. 
Compton. 
Wolfe and Richmond. 
Megantic. 


Town of Sherbrooke. 

THE THIRD SCHEDULE 

PROVINCIAL PUBLIC WORKS AND PROPERTY TO BE THE PROPERTY OF 
CANADA 

1. 
Canals, with Lands and Water Power connected therewith. 
2. 
Public Harbours. 
3. 
Lighthouses and Piers, and Sable Island. 
4. 
Steamboats, Dredges, and public Vessels. 
5. 
Rivers and Lake Improvements. 
6. 
Railways and Railway Stocks, Mortgages, and other Debts due by Railway 
Companies. 
7. 
Military Roads. 
8. 
Custom Houses, Post Offices, and all other Public Buildings, except such as 
the Government of Canada appropriate for the Use of the Provincial Legislatures 
and Governments. 
9. 
Property transferred by the Imperial Government, and known as Ordnance 
Property. 
10. 
Armouries, Drill Sheds, Military Clothing, and Munitions of War, and 
Lands set apart for general Public Purposes. 

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 

ASSETS TO BE THE PROPERTY OF ONTARIO AND QUEBEC CONJOINTLY 

Upper Canada Building Fund. 

Lunatic Asylums. 

Normal School. 

Court Houses in 

Aylmer, 


Lower Canada.

Montreal, 

Kamouraska, 

Law Society, Upper Canada. 

Montreal Turnpike Trust. 

University Permanent Fund. 

Royal Institution. 

Consolidated Municipal Loan Fund, Upper Canada. 

Consolidated Municipal Loan Fund, Lower Canada. 

Agricultural Society, Upper Canada. 

Lower Canada Legislative Grant. 

Quebec Fire Loan. 

Temiscouata Advance Account. 

Quebec Turnpike Trust. 

Education — East. 

Building and Jury Fund, Lower Canada. 

Municipalities Fund. 

Lower Canada Superior Education Income Fund. 

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE 
I A.B. do swear, That I will be faithful and bear true Allegiance to Her Majesty 
Queen Victoria. 

Note. — The Name of the King or Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Ireland for the Time being is to be substituted from Time to Time, with proper 
Terms of Reference thereto. 

DECLARATION OF QUALIFICATION 

I A.B. do declare and testify, That I am by Law duly qualified to be appointed a 
Member of the Senate of Canada [or as the Case may be], and that I am legally or 
equitably seised as of Freehold for my own Use and Benefit of Lands or Tenements 
held in Free and Common Socage [or seised or possessed for my own Use and Benefit 
of Lands or Tenements held in Franc-alleu or in Roture (as the Case may be),] 
in the Province of Nova Scotia [or as the Case may be] of the Value of Four thousand 
Dollars over and above all Rents, Dues, Debts, Mortgages, Charges, and In


cumbrances due or payable out of or charged on or affecting the same, and that I 
have not collusively or colourably obtained a Title to or become possessed of the 
said Lands and Tenements or any Part thereof for the Purpose of enabling me to become 
a Member of the Senate of Canada [or as the Case may be], and that my Real 
and Personal Property are together worth Four thousand Dollars over and above my 
Debts and Liabilities. 

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE (79) 


PRIMARY PRODUCTION FROM NON-RENEWABLE NATURAL 
RESOURCES AND FORESTRY RESOURCES 


1. For the purposes of section 92A of this Act, 
(a) production from a non-renewable natural resource is primary production 
therefrom if 
(i) it is in the form in which it exists upon its recovery or severance from its 
natural state, or 
(ii) it is a product resulting from processing or refining the resource, and is not 
a manufactured product or a product resulting from refining crude oil, refining 
upgraded heavy crude oil, refining gases or liquids derived from coal or refining 
a synthetic equivalent of crude oil; and 
(b) production from a forestry resource is primary production therefrom if it consists 
of sawlogs, poles, lumber, wood chips, sawdust or any other primary wood 
product, or wood pulp, and is not a product manufactured from wood. 
(79) 
As enacted by section 51 of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
CONSTITUTION ACT, 1982 (80) 

PART I 
CANADIAN CHARTER OF RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS 
Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of 
God and the rule of law: 

GUARANTEE OF RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS 

Rights and freedoms in Canada 

1. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the rights and freedoms 
set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be 
demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. 
FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS 

Fundamental freedoms 

2. Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms: 
(a) freedom of conscience and religion; 
(b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the 
press and other media of communication; 
(c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and 
(d) freedom of association. 
(80) 
Enacted as Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982, 1982, c. 11 (U.K.), which came into 
force on April 17, 1982. The Canada Act 1982, other than Schedules A and B thereto, 
reads as follows: 

An Act to give effect to a request by the Senate and House of Commons of Canada 

Whereas Canada has requested and consented to the enactment of an Act of the Parliament of the United King-
dom to give effect to the provisions hereinafter set forth and the Senate and the House of Commons of Canada in 
Parliament assembled have submitted an address to Her Majesty requesting that Her Majesty may graciously be 
pleased to cause a Bill to be laid before the Parliament of the United Kingdom for that purpose. 

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the 
same, as follows: 

1. The Constitution Act, 1982 set out in Schedule B to this Act is hereby enacted for and shall have the force 
of law in Canada and shall come into force as provided in that Act. 
2. No Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed after the Constitution Act, 1982 comes into force 
shall extend to Canada as part of its law. 
3. So far as it is not contained in Schedule B, the French version of this Act is set out in Schedule A to this 
Act and has the same authority in Canada as the English version thereof. 
4. This Act may be cited as the Canada Act 1982. 


Constitution Act, 1982 

DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS 

Democratic rights of citizens 

3. Every citizen of Canada has the right to vote in an election of members of the 
House of Commons or of a legislative assembly and to be qualified for membership 
therein. 
Maximum duration of legislative bodies 

4. (1) No House of Commons and no legislative assembly shall continue for 
longer than five years from the date fixed for the return of the writs at a general 
election of its members. (81) 
Continuation in special circumstances 

(2) In time of real or apprehended war, invasion or insurrection, a House of 
Commons may be continued by Parliament and a legislative assembly may be continued 
by the legislature beyond five years if such continuation is not opposed by 
the votes of more than one-third of the members of the House of Commons or the 
legislative assembly, as the case may be. (82) 
Annual sitting of legislative bodies 

5. There shall be a sitting of Parliament and of each legislature at least once every 
twelve months. (83) 
MOBILITY RIGHTS 

Mobility of citizens 

6. (1) Every citizen of Canada has the right to enter, remain in and leave 
Canada. 
Rights to move and gain livelihood 

(2) Every citizen of Canada and every person who has the status of a permanent 
resident of Canada has the right 
(a) to move to and take up residence in any province; and 
(b) to pursue the gaining of a livelihood in any province. 
(81) 
See section 50, and footnotes (40) and (42) to sections 85 and 88, of the Constitution 
Act, 1867. 

(82) 
Replaces part of Class 1 of section 91 of the Constitution Act, 1867, which was repealed 
as set out in subitem 1(3) of the schedule to the Constitution Act, 1982. 

(83) 
See footnotes (10), (41) and (42) to sections 20, 86 and 88 of the Constitution Act, 
1867.


Limitation 

(3) The rights specified in subsection (2) are subject to 
(a) any laws or practices of general application in force in a province other than 
those that discriminate among persons primarily on the basis of province of 
present or previous residence; and 
(b) any laws providing for reasonable residency requirements as a qualification 
for the receipt of publicly provided social services. 
Affirmative action programs 

(4) Subsections (2) and (3) do not preclude any law, program or activity that has 
as its object the amelioration in a province of conditions of individuals in that 
province who are socially or economically disadvantaged if the rate of employment 
in that province is below the rate of employment in Canada. 
LEGAL RIGHTS 

Life, liberty and security of person 

7. 
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right 
not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental 
justice. 
Search or seizure 

8. 
Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure. 
Detention or imprisonment 

9. 
Everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned. 
Arrest or detention 

10. 
Everyone has the right on arrest or detention 
(a) to be informed promptly of the reasons therefor; 
(b) to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be informed of that right; 
and 
(c) to have the validity of the detention determined by way of habeas corpus and 
to be released if the detention is not lawful. 
Proceedings in criminal and penal matters 

11. 
Any person charged with an offence has the right 
(a) to be informed without unreasonable delay of the specific offence; 
(b) to be tried within a reasonable time; 


(c) not to be compelled to be a witness in proceedings against that person in respect 
of the offence; 
(d) to be presumed innocent until proven guilty according to law in a fair and 
public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal; 
(e) not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause; 
(f) except in the case of an offence under military law tried before a military tribunal, 
to the benefit of trial by jury where the maximum punishment for the offence 
is imprisonment for five years or a more severe punishment; 
(g) not to be found guilty on account of any act or omission unless, at the time of 
the act or omission, it constituted an offence under Canadian or international law 
or was criminal according to the general principles of law recognized by the community 
of nations; 
(h) if finally acquitted of the offence, not to be tried for it again and, if finally 
found guilty and punished for the offence, not to be tried or punished for it again; 
and 
(i) if found guilty of the offence and if the punishment for the offence has been 
varied between the time of commission and the time of sentencing, to the benefit 
of the lesser punishment. 
Treatment or punishment 

12. 
Everyone has the right not to be subjected to any cruel and unusual treatment 
or punishment. 
Self-crimination 

13. 
A witness who testifies in any proceedings has the right not to have any incriminating 
evidence so given used to incriminate that witness in any other proceedings, 
except in a prosecution for perjury or for the giving of contradictory evidence. 
Interpreter 

14. 
A party or witness in any proceedings who does not understand or speak the 
language in which the proceedings are conducted or who is deaf has the right to the 
assistance of an interpreter. 
EQUALITY RIGHTS 

Equality before and under law and equal protection and benefit of law 

15. 
(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to 
the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, 
without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, 
sex, age or mental or physical disability. 




Affirmative action programs 

(2) Subsection (1) does not preclude any law, program or activity that has as its 
object the amelioration of conditions of disadvantaged individuals or groups including 
those that are disadvantaged because of race, national or ethnic origin, colour, 
religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability. (84) 
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES OF CANADA 

Official languages of Canada 

16. (1) English and French are the official languages of Canada and have equality 
of status and equal rights and privileges as to their use in all institutions of the Parliament and government of Canada. 
Official languages of New Brunswick 

(2) English and French are the official languages of New Brunswick and have 
equality of status and equal rights and privileges as to their use in all institutions of 
the legislature and government of New Brunswick. 
Advancement of status and use 

(3) Nothing in this Charter limits the authority of Parliament or a legislature to 
advance the equality of status or use of English and French. 
English and French linguistic communities in New Brunswick 

16.1 (1) The English linguistic community and the French linguistic community 
in New Brunswick have equality of status and equal rights and privileges, including 
the right to distinct educational institutions and such distinct cultural institutions as 
are necessary for the preservation and promotion of those communities. 
Role of the legislature and government of New Brunswick 

(2) The role of the legislature and government of New Brunswick to preserve 
and promote the status, rights and privileges referred to in subsection (1) is affirmed. 
(85) 
(84) 
Subsection 32(2) provides that section 15 shall not have effect until three years after 
section 32 comes into force. Section 32 came into force on April 17, 1982; therefore, 
section 15 had effect on April 17, 1985. 

(85) 
Section 16.1 was added by the Constitution Amendment, 1993 (New Brunswick) (see 
SI/93-54). 


Proceedings of Parliament 

17. (1) Everyone has the right to use English or French in any debates and other 
proceedings of Parliament. (86) 
Proceedings of New Brunswick legislature 

(2) Everyone has the right to use English or French in any debates and other proceedings 
of the legislature of New Brunswick. (87) 
Parliamentary statutes and records 

18. (1) The statutes, records and journals of Parliament shall be printed and published 
in English and French and both language versions are equally authoritative. 
(88) 
New Brunswick statutes and records 

(2) The statutes, records and journals of the legislature of New Brunswick shall 
be printed and published in English and French and both language versions are 
equally authoritative. (89) 
Proceedings in courts established by Parliament 

19. (1) Either English or French may be used by any person in, or in any pleading 
in or process issuing from, any court established by Parliament. (90) 
Proceedings in New Brunswick courts 

(2) Either English or French may be used by any person in, or in any pleading in 
or process issuing from, any court of New Brunswick. (91) 
Communications by public with federal institutions 

20. (1) Any member of the public in Canada has the right to communicate with, 
and to receive available services from, any head or central office of an institution of 
the Parliament or government of Canada in English or French, and has the same 
right with respect to any other office of any such institution where 
(86) 
See section 133 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and footnote (67). 

(87) 
Ibid. 

(88) 
Ibid. 

(89) 
Ibid. 

(90) 
Ibid. 

(91) 
Ibid. 






Constitution Act, 1982 


(a) there is a significant demand for communications with and services from that 
office in such language; or 
(b) due to the nature of the office, it is reasonable that communications with and 
services from that office be available in both English and French. 
Communications by public with New Brunswick institutions 

(2) Any member of the public in New Brunswick has the right to communicate 
with, and to receive available services from, any office of an institution of the legislature 
or government of New Brunswick in English or French. 
Continuation of existing constitutional provisions 

21. Nothing in sections 16 to 20 abrogates or derogates from any right, privilege 
or obligation with respect to the English and French languages, or either of them, 
that exists or is continued by virtue of any other provision of the Constitution of 
Canada. (92) 
Rights and privileges preserved 

22. Nothing in sections 16 to 20 abrogates or derogates from any legal or customary 
right or privilege acquired or enjoyed either before or after the coming into 
force of this Charter with respect to any language that is not English or French. 
MINORITY LANGUAGE EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS 

Language of instruction 

23. (1) Citizens of Canada 
(a) whose first language learned and still understood is that of the English or 
French linguistic minority population of the province in which they reside, or 
(b) who have received their primary school instruction in Canada in English or 
French and reside in a province where the language in which they received that 
instruction is the language of the English or French linguistic minority population 
of the province, 
have the right to have their children receive primary and secondary school instruction 
in that language in that province. (93) 

Continuity of language instruction 

(2) Citizens of Canada of whom any child has received or is receiving primary or 
secondary school instruction in English or French in Canada, have the right to have 
(92) 
See, for example, section 133 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and the reference to the 
Manitoba Act, 1870 in footnote (67) to that section. 

(93) 
Paragraph 23(1)(a) is not in force in respect of Quebec. See section 59, below. 



all their children receive primary and secondary school instruction in the same language. 


Application where numbers warrant 

(3) The right of citizens of Canada under subsections (1) and (2) to have their 
children receive primary and secondary school instruction in the language of the 
English or French linguistic minority population of a province 
(a) applies wherever in the province the number of children of citizens who have 
such a right is sufficient to warrant the provision to them out of public funds of 
minority language instruction; and 
(b) includes, where the number of those children so warrants, the right to have 
them receive that instruction in minority language educational facilities provided 
out of public funds. 
ENFORCEMENT 

Enforcement of guaranteed rights and freedoms 

24. 
(1) Anyone whose rights or freedoms, as guaranteed by this Charter, have 
been infringed or denied may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain 
such remedy as the court considers appropriate and just in the circumstances. 
Exclusion of evidence bringing administration of justice into disrepute 

(2) Where, in proceedings under subsection (1), a court concludes that evidence 
was obtained in a manner that infringed or denied any rights or freedoms guaranteed 
by this Charter, the evidence shall be excluded if it is established that, having regard 
to all the circumstances, the admission of it in the proceedings would bring the administration 
of justice into disrepute. 
 

GENERAL 

Aboriginal rights and freedoms not affected by Charter 

25. The guarantee in this Charter of certain rights and freedoms shall not be construed 
so as to abrogate or derogate from any aboriginal, treaty or other rights or 
freedoms that pertain to the aboriginal peoples of Canada including 
(a) any rights or freedoms that have been recognized by the Royal Proclamation 
of October 7, 1763; and 
(b) any rights or freedoms that now exist by way of land claims agreements or 
may be so acquired. (94) 
Other rights and freedoms not affected by Charter 

26. The guarantee in this Charter of certain rights and freedoms shall not be construed 
as denying the existence of any other rights or freedoms that exist in Canada. 
Multicultural heritage 

27. This Charter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the preservation 
and enhancement of the multicultural heritage of Canadians. 
Rights guaranteed equally to both sexes 

28. Notwithstanding anything in this Charter, the rights and freedoms referred to 
in it are guaranteed equally to male and female persons. 
Rights respecting certain schools preserved 

29. Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges 
guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, 
separate or dissentient schools. (95) 
Application to territories and territorial authorities 

30. A reference in this Charter to a province or to the legislative assembly or legislature 
of a province shall be deemed to include a reference to the Yukon Territory 
and the Northwest Territories, or to the appropriate legislative authority thereof, as 
the case may be. 
(94) 
Paragraph 25(b) was repealed and re-enacted by the Constitution Amendment 
Proclamation, 1983 (see SI/84-102). Paragraph 25(b) originally read as follows: 

(b) any rights or freedoms that may be acquired by the aboriginal peoples of Canada by way of land claims 
settlement. 
(95) 
See section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and footnote (50). 


Legislative powers not extended 

31. 
Nothing in this Charter extends the legislative powers of any body or authority. 
APPLICATION OF CHARTER 

Application of Charter 

32. 
(1) This Charter applies 
(a) to the Parliament and government of Canada in respect of all matters within 
the authority of Parliament including all matters relating to the Yukon Territory 
and Northwest Territories; and 
(b) to the legislature and government of each province in respect of all matters 
within the authority of the legislature of each province. 
Exception 

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), section 15 shall not have effect until three 
years after this section comes into force. 
Exception where express declaration 

33. 
(1) Parliament or the legislature of a province may expressly declare in an 
Act of Parliament or of the legislature, as the case may be, that the Act or a provision 
thereof shall operate notwithstanding a provision included in section 2 or sections 
7 to 15 of this Charter. 
Operation of exception 

(2) An Act or a provision of an Act in respect of which a declaration made under 
this section is in effect shall have such operation as it would have but for the provision 
of this Charter referred to in the declaration. 
Five year limitation 

(3) A declaration made under subsection (1) shall cease to have effect five years 
after it comes into force or on such earlier date as may be specified in the declaration. 
Re-enactment 

(4) Parliament or the legislature of a province may re-enact a declaration made 
under subsection (1). 
Five year limitation 

(5) Subsection (3) applies in respect of a re-enactment made under subsection 
(4).  

Citation 

34. This Part may be cited as the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
PART II 

RIGHTS OF THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLES OF CANADA 
Recognition of existing aboriginal and treaty rights 

35. (1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of 
Canada are hereby recognized and affirmed. 
Definition of “aboriginal peoples of Canada” 

(2) In this Act, “aboriginal peoples of Canada” includes the Indian, Inuit and 
Métis peoples of Canada. 
Land claims agreements 

(3) For greater certainty, in subsection (1) “treaty rights” includes rights that now 
exist by way of land claims agreements or may be so acquired. 
Aboriginal and treaty rights are guaranteed equally to both sexes 

(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the aboriginal and treaty 
rights referred to in subsection (1) are guaranteed equally to male and female persons. 
(96) 
Commitment to participation in constitutional conference 

35.1 The government of Canada and the provincial governments are committed 
to the principle that, before any amendment is made to Class 24 of section 91 of the 
“Constitution Act, 1867”, to section 25 of this Act or to this Part, 
(a) a constitutional conference that includes in its agenda an item relating to the 
proposed amendment, composed of the Prime Minister of Canada and the first 
ministers of the provinces, will be convened by the Prime Minister of Canada; 
and 
(b) the Prime Minister of Canada will invite representatives of the aboriginal 
peoples of Canada to participate in the discussions on that item. (97) 
(96) 
Subsections 35(3) and (4) were added by the Constitution Amendment Proclamation, 
1983 (see SI/84-102). 

(97) 
Section 35.1 was added by the Constitution Amendment Proclamation, 1983 (see SI/ 
84-102). 

PART III 
EQUALIZATION AND REGIONAL DISPARITIES 


Commitment to promote equal opportunities 

36. (1) Without altering the legislative authority of Parliament or of the provincial 
legislatures, or the rights of any of them with respect to the exercise of their 
legislative authority, Parliament and the legislatures, together with the government 
of Canada and the provincial governments, are committed to 
(a) promoting equal opportunities for the well-being of Canadians; 
(b) furthering economic development to reduce disparity in opportunities; and 
(c) providing essential public services of reasonable quality to all Canadians. 
Commitment respecting public services 

(2) Parliament and the government of Canada are committed to the principle of 
making equalization payments to ensure that provincial governments have sufficient 
revenues to provide reasonably comparable levels of public services at reasonably 
comparable levels of taxation. (98) 
PART IV 
CONSTITUTIONAL CONFERENCE 


37. Repealed. (99) 
(98) 
See footnotes (58) and (59) to sections 114 and 118 of the Constitution Act, 1867. 

(99) 
Section 54 of the Constitution Act, 1982 provided for the repeal of Part IV (section 
37) one year after Part VII came into force. Part VII came into force on April 17, 
1982 repealing Part IV on April 17, 1983. Section 37 read as follows: 

37. (1) A constitutional conference composed of the Prime Minister of Canada and the first ministers of the 
provinces shall be convened by the Prime Minister of Canada within one year after this Part comes into force. 
(2) The conference convened under subsection (1) shall have included in its agenda an item respecting constitutional 
matters that directly affect the aboriginal peoples of Canada, including the identification and definition 
of the rights of those peoples to be included in the Constitution of Canada, and the Prime Minister of Canada 
shall invite representatives of those peoples to participate in the discussions on that item. 
(3) The Prime Minister of Canada shall invite elected representatives of the governments of the Yukon Terri-
tory and the Northwest Territories to participate in the discussions on any item on the agenda of the conference 
convened under subsection (1) that, in the opinion of the Prime Minister, directly affects the Yukon Territory and 
the Northwest Territories. 

PART IV.I 
CONSTITUTIONAL CONFERENCES 


37.1 Repealed. (100) 
PART V 
PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING CONSTITUTION OF CANADA (101) 


General procedure for amending Constitution of Canada 

38. (1) An amendment to the Constitution of Canada may be made by proclamation 
issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada where so authorized 
by 
(a) resolutions of the Senate and House of Commons; and 
(b) resolutions of the legislative assemblies of at least two-thirds of the provinces 
that have, in the aggregate, according to the then latest general census, at least 
fifty per cent of the population of all the provinces. 
Majority of members 

(2) An amendment made under subsection (1) that derogates from the legislative 
powers, the proprietary rights or any other rights or privileges of the legislature or 
government of a province shall require a resolution supported by a majority of the 
(100) 
Part IV.1 (section 37.1), which was added by the Constitution Amendment Proclamation, 
1983 (see SI/84-102), was repealed on April 18, 1987 by section 54.1 of the Constitution 
Act, 1982. Section 37.1 read as follows: 

37.1 (1) In addition to the conference convened in March 1983, at least two constitutional conferences composed 
of the Prime Minister of Canada and the first ministers of the provinces shall be convened by the Prime 
Minister of Canada, the first within three years after April 17, 1982 and the second within five years after that 
date. 
(2) Each conference convened under subsection (1) shall have included in its agenda constitutional matters 
that directly affect the aboriginal peoples of Canada, and the Prime Minister of Canada shall invite representatives 
of those peoples to participate in the discussions on those matters. 
(3) The Prime Minister of Canada shall invite elected representatives of the governments of the Yukon Terri-
tory and the Northwest Territories to participate in the discussions on any item on the agenda of a conference 
convened under subsection (1) that, in the opinion of the Prime Minister, directly affects the Yukon Territory and 
the Northwest Territories. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to derogate from subsection 35(1). 
(101) 
Prior to the enactment of Part V, certain provisions of the Constitution of Canada 
and the provincial constitutions could be amended pursuant to the Constitution Act, 
1867. See footnotes (44) and (48) to section 91, Class 1 and section 92, Class 1 of that 
Act, respectively. Other amendments to the Constitution could only be made by 
enactment of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. 





members of each of the Senate, the House of Commons and the legislative assemblies 
required under subsection (1). 

Expression of dissent 

(3) An amendment referred to in subsection (2) shall not have effect in a 
province the legislative assembly of which has expressed its dissent thereto by resolution 
supported by a majority of its members prior to the issue of the proclamation 
to which the amendment relates unless that legislative assembly, subsequently, by 
resolution supported by a majority of its members, revokes its dissent and authorizes 
the amendment. 
Revocation of dissent 

(4) A resolution of dissent made for the purposes of subsection (3) may be revoked 
at any time before or after the issue of the proclamation to which it relates. 
Restriction on proclamation 

39. 
(1) A proclamation shall not be issued under subsection 38(1) before the expiration 
of one year from the adoption of the resolution initiating the amendment 
procedure thereunder, unless the legislative assembly of each province has previously 
adopted a resolution of assent or dissent. 
Idem 

(2) A proclamation shall not be issued under subsection 38(1) after the expiration 
of three years from the adoption of the resolution initiating the amendment procedure 
thereunder. 
Compensation 

40. 
Where an amendment is made under subsection 38(1) that transfers provincial 
legislative powers relating to education or other cultural matters from provincial 
legislatures to Parliament, Canada shall provide reasonable compensation to any 
province to which the amendment does not apply. 
Amendment by unanimous consent 

41. 
An amendment to the Constitution of Canada in relation to the following 
matters may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the 
Great Seal of Canada only where authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House 
of Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province: 
(a) the office of the Queen, the Governor General and the Lieutenant Governor 
of a province; 
(b) the right of a province to a number of members in the House of Commons 
not less than the number of Senators by which the province is entitled to be represented 
at the time this Part comes into force; 




Constitution Act, 1982 


(c) subject to section 43, the use of the English or the French language; 
(d) the composition of the Supreme Court of Canada; and 
(e) an amendment to this Part. 
Amendment by general procedure 

42. 
(1) An amendment to the Constitution of Canada in relation to the following 
matters may be made only in accordance with subsection 38(1): 
(a) the principle of proportionate representation of the provinces in the House of 
Commons prescribed by the Constitution of Canada; 
(b) the powers of the Senate and the method of selecting Senators; 
(c) the number of members by which a province is entitled to be represented in 
the Senate and the residence qualifications of Senators; 
(d) subject to paragraph 41(d), the Supreme Court of Canada; 
(e) the extension of existing provinces into the territories; and 
(f) notwithstanding any other law or practice, the establishment of new 
provinces. 
Exception 

(2) Subsections 38(2) to (4) do not apply in respect of amendments in relation to 
matters referred to in subsection (1). 
Amendment of provisions relating to some but not all provinces 

43. 
An amendment to the Constitution of Canada in relation to any provision that 
applies to one or more, but not all, provinces, including 
(a) any alteration to boundaries between provinces, and 
(b) any amendment to any provision that relates to the use of the English or the 
French language within a province, 
may be made by proclamation issued by the Governor General under the Great Seal 
of Canada only where so authorized by resolutions of the Senate and House of 
Commons and of the legislative assembly of each province to which the amendment 
applies. 

Amendments by Parliament 

44. 
Subject to sections 41 and 42, Parliament may exclusively make laws amending 
the Constitution of Canada in relation to the executive government of Canada or 
the Senate and House of Commons.  





Amendments by provincial legislatures 

45. Subject to section 41, the legislature of each province may exclusively make 
laws amending the constitution of the province. 
Initiation of amendment procedures 

46. (1) The procedures for amendment under sections 38, 41, 42 and 43 may be 
initiated either by the Senate or the House of Commons or by the legislative assembly 
of a province. 
Revocation of authorization 

(2) A resolution of assent made for the purposes of this Part may be revoked at 
any time before the issue of a proclamation authorized by it. 
Amendments without Senate resolution 

47. (1) An amendment to the Constitution of Canada made by proclamation un-
der section 38, 41, 42 or 43 may be made without a resolution of the Senate authorizing 
the issue of the proclamation if, within one hundred and eighty days after the 
adoption by the House of Commons of a resolution authorizing its issue, the Senate 
has not adopted such a resolution and if, at any time after the expiration of that period, 
the House of Commons again adopts the resolution. 
Computation of period 

(2) Any period when Parliament is prorogued or dissolved shall not be counted 
in computing the one hundred and eighty day period referred to in subsection (1). 
Advice to issue proclamation 

48. The Queen’s Privy Council for Canada shall advise the Governor General to 
issue a proclamation under this Part forthwith on the adoption of the resolutions required 
for an amendment made by proclamation under this Part. 
Constitutional conference 

49. A constitutional conference composed of the Prime Minister of Canada and 
the first ministers of the provinces shall be convened by the Prime Minister of 
Canada within fifteen years after this Part comes into force to review the provisions 
of this Part. (102) 
(102) 
A First Ministers Meeting was held June 20-21, 1996. 


 

PART VI 
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867 


(103)
50. 
(104)
51. 
PART VII 
GENERAL 


Primacy of Constitution of Canada 

52. (1) The Constitution of Canada is the supreme law of Canada, and any law 
that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution is, to the extent of the inconsistency, 
of no force or effect. 
Constitution of Canada 

(2) The Constitution of Canada includes 
(a) the Canada Act 1982, including this Act; 
(b) the Acts and orders referred to in the schedule; and 
(c) any amendment to any Act or order referred to in paragraph (a) or (b). 
Amendments to Constitution of Canada 

(3) Amendments to the Constitution of Canada shall be made only in accordance 
with the authority contained in the Constitution of Canada. 
Repeals and new names 

53. (1) The enactments referred to in Column I of the schedule are hereby repealed 
or amended to the extent indicated in Column II thereof and, unless repealed, 
shall continue as law in Canada under the names set out in Column III thereof. 
Consequential amendments 

(2) Every enactment, except the Canada Act 1982, that refers to an enactment referred 
to in the schedule by the name in Column I thereof is hereby amended by 
substituting for that name the corresponding name in Column III thereof, and any 
British North America Act not referred to in the schedule may be cited as the Constitution 
Act followed by the year and number, if any, of its enactment. 
(103) 
The text of this amendment is set out in the Constitution Act, 1867, as section 92A. 

(104) 
The text of this amendment is set out in the Constitution Act, 1867, as the Sixth 
Schedule. 


Repeal and consequential amendments 

54. Part IV is repealed on the day that is one year after this Part comes into force 
and this section may be repealed and this Act renumbered, consequentially upon the 
repeal of Part IV and this section, by proclamation issued by the Governor General 
under the Great Seal of Canada. (105) 
54.1 Repealed. (106) 
French version of Constitution of Canada 

55. A French version of the portions of the Constitution of Canada referred to in 
the schedule shall be prepared by the Minister of Justice of Canada as expeditiously 
as possible and, when any portion thereof sufficient to warrant action being taken 
has been so prepared, it shall be put forward for enactment by proclamation issued 
by the Governor General under the Great Seal of Canada pursuant to the procedure 
then applicable to an amendment of the same provisions of the Constitution of 
Canada. (107) 
English and French versions of certain constitutional texts 

56. Where any portion of the Constitution of Canada has been or is enacted in 
English and French or where a French version of any portion of the Constitution is 
enacted pursuant to section 55, the English and French versions of that portion of 
the Constitution are equally authoritative. 
English and French versions of this Act 

57. The English and French versions of this Act are equally authoritative. 
Commencement 

58. Subject to section 59, this Act shall come into force on a day to be fixed by 
proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the Great Seal of 
Canada. (108) 
(105) 
Part VII came into force on April 17, 1982 (see SI/82-97). 

(106) 
Section 54.1, which was added by the Constitution Amendment Proclamation, 1983 
(see SI/84-102), provided for the repeal of Part IV.1 and section 54.1 on April 18, 1987. 
Section 54.1 read as follows: 

54.1 Part IV.1 and this section are repealed on April 18, 1987. 
(107) 
The French Constitutional Drafting Committee was established in 1984 with a 
mandate to assist the Minister of Justice in that task. The Committee’s Final Report 
was tabled in Parliament in December 1990. 

(108) 
The Act, with the exception of paragraph 23(1)(a) in respect of Quebec, came into 
force on April 17, 1982 by proclamation issued by the Queen (see SI/82-97). 

Commencement of paragraph 
23(1)(a) in respect of Quebec 

59. (1) Paragraph 23(1)(a) shall come into force in respect of Quebec on a day 
to be fixed by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor General under the 
Great Seal of Canada. 
Authorization of Quebec 

(2) A proclamation under subsection (1) shall be issued only where authorized 
by the legislative assembly or government of Quebec. (109) 
Repeal of this section 

(3) This section may be repealed on the day paragraph 23(1)(a) comes into force 
in respect of Quebec and this Act amended and renumbered, consequentially upon 
the repeal of this section, by proclamation issued by the Queen or the Governor 
General under the Great Seal of Canada. 
Short title and citations 

60. This Act may be cited as the Constitution Act, 1982, and the Constitution 
Acts 1867 to 1975 (No. 2) and this Act may be cited together as the Constitution 
Acts, 1867 to 1982. 
References 

61. A reference to the “Constitution Acts, 1867 to 1982” shall be deemed to include 
a reference to the “Constitution Amendment Proclamation, 1983”. (110) 
(109) 
No proclamation has been issued under section 59. 

(110) 
Section 61 was added by the Constitution Amendment Proclamation, 1983 (see SI/ 
84-102). See also section 3 of the Constitution Act, 1985 (Representation), S.C. 1986, c. 8, 
Part I and the Constitution Amendment, 1987 (Newfoundland Act) (see SI/88-11). 




SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION ACT, 1982 

(Section 53) 

MODERNIZATION OF THE CONSTITUTION 

Column I Column II Column III 
Item Act Affected Amendment New Name 

1. 
British North America Act, 
1867, 30-31 Vict., c. 3 (U.K.) 
2. 
An Act to amend and continue 
the Act 32-33 Victoria 
chapter 3; and to establish and 
provide for the Government of 
the Province of Manitoba, 1870, 
33 Vict., c. 3 (Can.) 
3. 
Order of Her Majesty in 
Council admitting Rupert’s 
Land and the North-Western 
Territory into the union, dated 
the 23rd day of June, 1870 
4. 
Order of Her Majesty in 
Council admitting British 
Columbia into the Union, dated 
the 16th day of May, 1871. 
5. 
British North America Act, 
1871, 34-35 Vict., c. 28 (U.K.) 
6. 
Order of Her Majesty in 
Council admitting Prince 
Edward Island into the Union, 
dated the 26th day of June, 
1873. 
7. 
Parliament of Canada Act, 
1875, 38-39 Vict., c. 38 (U.K.) 
(1) Section 1 is repealed and 
the following substituted therefor: 
“1. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1867.” 

(2) Section 20 is repealed. 
(3) Class 1 of section 91 is 
repealed. 
(4) Class 1 of section 92 is 
repealed. 
(1) The long title is repealed 
and the following substituted 
therefor: 
“Manitoba Act, 1870.” 

(2) Section 20 is repealed. 
Section 1 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“1. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1871.” 

Constitution Act, 
1867 

Manitoba Act, 1870 

Rupert’s Land and 
North-Western 
Territory Order 

British Columbia 
Terms of Union 

Constitution Act, 
1871 

Prince Edward 
Island Terms of 
Union 

Parliament of 
Canada Act, 1875




Constitution Act, 1982 


Column I Column II Column III 
Item Act Affected Amendment New Name 

8. 
Order of Her Majesty in 
Council admitting all British 
possessions and Territories in 
North America and islands 
adjacent thereto into the Union, 
dated the 31st day of July, 
1880. 
9. 
British North America Act, 
1886, 49-50 Vict., c. 35 (U.K.) 
10. 
Canada (Ontario Boundary) 
Act, 1889, 52-53 Vict., c. 28 
(U.K.) 
11. 
Canadian Speaker 
(Appointment of Deputy) Act, 
1895, 2nd Sess., 59 Vict., c. 3 
(U.K.) 
12. 
The Alberta Act, 1905, 
4-5 Edw. VII, c. 3 (Can.) 
13. 
The Saskatchewan Act, 1905, 
4-5 Edw. VII, c. 42 (Can.) 
14. 
British North America Act, 
1907, 7 Edw. VII, c. 11 (U.K.) 
15. 
British North America Act, 
1915, 5-6 Geo. V, c. 45 (U.K.) 
16. 
British North America Act, 
1930, 20-21 Geo. V, c. 26 
(U.K.) 
17. 
Statute of Westminster, 1931, 
22 Geo. V, c. 4 (U.K.) 
18. 
British North America Act, 
1940, 3-4 Geo. VI, c. 36 (U.K.) 
Section 3 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“3. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1886.” 

The Act is repealed. 

Section 2 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“2. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1907.” 

Section 3 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“3. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1915.” 

Section 3 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“3. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1930.” 

In so far as they apply to 
Canada, 

(a) section 4 is repealed; and 
(b) subsection 7(1) is repealed. 
Section 2 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“2. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1940.” 

Adjacent Territories 
Order 

Constitution Act, 
1886 

Canada (Ontario 
Boundary) Act, 
1889 

Alberta Act 

Saskatchewan Act 

Constitution Act, 
1907 

Constitution Act, 
1915 

Constitution Act, 
1930 

Statute of 
Westminster, 1931 

Constitution Act, 
1940 

73 




Constitution Act, 1982 


Column I Column II Column III 
Item Act Affected Amendment New Name 

19. 
British North America Act, 
1943, 6-7 Geo. VI, c. 30 (U.K.) 
20. 
British North America Act, 
1946, 9-10 Geo. VI, c. 63 
(U.K.) 
21. 
British North America Act, 
1949, 12-13 Geo. VI, c. 22 
(U.K.) 
22. 
British North America (No. 2) 
Act, 1949, 13 Geo. VI, c. 81 
(U.K.) 
23. 
British North America Act, 
1951, 14-15 Geo. VI, c. 32 
(U.K.) 
24. 
British North America Act, 
1952, 1 Eliz. II, c. 15 (Can.) 
25. 
British North America Act, 
1960, 9 Eliz. II, c. 2 (U.K.) 
26. 
British North America Act, 
1964, 12-13 Eliz. II, c. 73 
(U.K.) 
27. 
British North America Act, 
1965, 14 Eliz. II, c. 4, Part I 
(Can.) 
28. 
British North America Act, 
1974, 23 Eliz. II, c. 13, Part I 
(Can.) 
29. 
British North America Act, 
1975, 23-24 Eliz. II, c. 28, 
Part I (Can.) 
The Act is repealed. 

The Act is repealed. 

Section 3 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“3. This Act may be cited 
as the Newfoundland Act.” 

The Act is repealed. 

The Act is repealed. 

The Act is repealed. 

Section 2 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“2. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1960.” 

Section 2 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“2. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1964.” 

Section 2 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“2. This Part may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1965.” 

Section 3, as amended by 
25-26 Eliz. II, c. 28, s. 38(1) 
(Can.), is repealed and the following 
substituted therefor: 

“3. This Part may be cited 
as the Constitution Act, 1974.” 

Section 3, as amended by 
25-26 Eliz. II, c. 28, s. 31 (Can.), 
is repealed and the following 
substituted therefor: 

“3. This Part may be cited 
as the Constitution Act (No. 1), 
1975.” 

Newfoundland Act 

Constitution Act, 
1960 

Constitution Act, 
1964 

Constitution Act, 
1965 

Constitution Act, 
1974 

Constitution Act 
(No. 1), 1975 

74 




Constitution Act, 1982 


Column I Column II Column III 
Item Act Affected Amendment New Name 
30. British North America Act 
(No. 2), 1975, 23-24 Eliz. II, 
c. 53 (Can.) 
Section 3 is repealed and the 
following substituted therefor: 
“3. This Act may be cited 
as the Constitution Act (No. 2), 
1975.” 
Constitution Act 
(No. 2), 1975 



ENDNOTE 1 

FURTHER DETAILS OF CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867, SECTION 5 [FOOTNOTE (6)] 

The first territories added to the Union were Rupert’s Land and the North-Western 
Territory (subsequently designated the Northwest Territories), which were admitted 
pursuant to section 146 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and the Rupert’s Land Act, 1868, 
31-32 Vict., c. 105 (U.K.), by the Rupert’s Land and North-Western Territory Order of 
June 23, 1870, effective July 15, 1870. Prior to the admission of those territories, the 
Parliament of Canada enacted An Act for the temporary Government of Rupert’s Land 
and the North-Western Territory when united with Canada (32-33 Vict., c. 3), and the 
Manitoba Act, 1870 (33 Vict., c. 3), which provided for the formation of the Province of 
Manitoba. 

British Columbia was admitted into the Union pursuant to section 146 of the Constitution 
Act, 1867, by the British Columbia Terms of Union, being Order in Council of 
May 16, 1871, effective July 20, 1871. 

Prince Edward Island was admitted pursuant to section 146 of the Constitution Act, 
1867, by the Prince Edward Island Terms of Union, being Order in Council of June 26, 
1873, effective July 1, 1873. 

On June 29, 1871, the United Kingdom Parliament enacted the Constitution Act, 
1871 (34-35 Vict., c. 28) authorizing the creation of additional provinces out of territories 
not included in any province. Pursuant to this statute, the Parliament of Canada 
enacted the Alberta Act (July 20, 1905, 4-5 Edw. VII, c. 3) and the Saskatchewan Act 
(July 20, 1905, 4-5 Edw. VII, c. 42), providing for the creation of the provinces of Alberta 
and Saskatchewan, respectively. Both of these Acts came into force on September 
1, 1905. 

Meanwhile, all remaining British possessions and territories in North America and 
the islands adjacent thereto, except the colony of Newfoundland and its dependencies, 
were admitted into the Canadian Confederation by the Adjacent Territories Order, dated 
July 31, 1880. 

The Parliament of Canada added portions of the Northwest Territories to the adjoining 
provinces in 1912 by The Ontario Boundaries Extension Act, S.C. 1912, 
2 Geo. V, c. 40, The Quebec Boundaries Extension Act, 1912, 2 Geo. V, c. 45 and The 
Manitoba Boundaries Extension Act, 1912, 2 Geo. V, c. 32, and further additions were 
made to Manitoba by The Manitoba Boundaries Extension Act, 1930, 20-21 Geo. V, 

c. 28. 
The Yukon Territory was created out of the Northwest Territories in 1898 by The 
Yukon Territory Act, 61 Vict., c. 6 (Can.). 

Newfoundland was added on March 31, 1949, by the Newfoundland Act, 
12-13 Geo. VI, c. 22 (U.K.), which ratified the Terms of Union of Newfoundland with 
Canada. 

Nunavut was created out of the Northwest Territories in 1999 by the Nunavut Act, 

S.C. 1993, c. 28. 


ENDNOTE 2 

FURTHER DETAILS OF CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867, SECTION 51 [FOOTNOTE 27] 

Section 51 was amended by the Statute Law Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 
(U.K.) by repealing the words after “of the census” to “seventy-one and” and the word 
“subsequent”. 

By the British North America Act, 1943, 6-7 Geo. VI, c. 30 (U.K.), which Act was repealed 
by the Constitution Act, 1982, redistribution of seats following the 1941 census 
was postponed until the first session of Parliament after the war. The section was reenacted 
by the British North America Act, 1946, 9-10 Geo. VI, c. 63 (U.K.), which Act 
was also repealed by the Constitution Act, 1982, to read as follows: 

51. (1) The number of members of the House of Commons shall be two hundred and fifty-five and the representation 
of the provinces therein shall forthwith upon the coming into force of this section and thereafter on the 
completion of each decennial census be readjusted by such authority, in such manner, and from such time as the 
Parliament of Canada from time to time provides, subject and according to the following rules: 
(1) Subject as hereinafter provided, there shall be assigned to each of the provinces a number of members 
computed by dividing the total population of the provinces by two hundred and fifty-four and by dividing the 
population of each province by the quotient so obtained, disregarding, except as hereinafter in this section provided, 
the remainder, if any, after the said process of division. 
(2) If the total number of members assigned to all the provinces pursuant to rule one is less than two hundred 
and fifty-four, additional members shall be assigned to the provinces (one to a province) having remainders in 
the computation under rule one commencing with the province having the largest remainder and continuing 
with the other provinces in the order of the magnitude of their respective remainders until the total number of 
members assigned is two hundred and fifty-four. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this section, if upon completion of a computation under rules one and two, 
the number of members to be assigned to a province is less than the number of senators representing the said 
province, rules one and two shall cease to apply in respect of the said province, and there shall be assigned to 
the said province a number of members equal to the said number of senators. 
(4) In the event that rules one and two cease to apply in respect of a province then, for the purpose of computing 
the number of members to be assigned to the provinces in respect of which rules one and two continue to 
apply, the total population of the provinces shall be reduced by the number of the population of the province in 
respect of which rules one and two have ceased to apply and the number two hundred and fifty-four shall be 
reduced by the number of members assigned to such province pursuant to rule three. 
(5) Such readjustment shall not take effect until the termination of the then existing Parliament. 
(2) The Yukon Territory as constituted by Chapter forty-one of the Statutes of Canada, 1901, together with 
any Part of Canada not comprised within a province which may from time to time be included therein by the 
Parliament of Canada for the purposes of representation in Parliament, shall be entitled to one member. 
The section was re-enacted as follows by the British North America Act, 1952, 

S.C. 1952, c. 15 (which Act was also repealed by the Constitution Act, 1982): 
51. (1) Subject as hereinafter provided, the number of members of the House of Commons shall be two hundred 
and sixty-three and the representation of the provinces therein shall forthwith upon the coming into force of 
this section and thereafter on the completion of each decennial census be readjusted by such authority, in such 
manner, and from such time as the Parliament of Canada from time to time provides, subject and according to the 
following rules: 
1. There shall be assigned to each of the provinces a number of members computed by dividing the total population 
of the provinces by two hundred and sixty-one and by dividing the population of each province by the 
quotient so obtained, disregarding, except as hereinafter in this section provided, the remainder, if any, after the 
said process of division. 
2. If the total number of members assigned to all the provinces pursuant to rule one is less than two hundred 
and sixty-one, additional members shall be assigned to the provinces (one to a province) having remainders in 
the computation under rule one commencing with the province having the largest remainder and continuing with the other provinces in the order of the magnitude of their respective remainders until the total number of members 
assigned is two hundred and sixty-one. 

3. Notwithstanding anything in this section, if upon completion of a computation under rules one and two the 
number of members to be assigned to a province is less than the number of senators representing the said 
province, rules one and two shall cease to apply in respect of the said province, and there shall be assigned to the 
said province a number of members equal to the said number of senators. 
4. In the event that rules one and two cease to apply in respect of a province then, for the purposes of computing 
the number of members to be assigned to the provinces in respect of which rules one and two continue to 
apply, the total population of the provinces shall be reduced by the number of the population of the province in 
respect of which rules one and two have ceased to apply and the number two hundred and sixty-one shall be 
reduced by the number of members assigned to such province pursuant to rule three. 
5. On any such readjustment the number of members for any province shall not be reduced by more than fifteen 
per cent below the representation to which such province was entitled under rules one to four of this subsection 
at the last preceding readjustment of the representation of that province, and there shall be no reduction in 
the representation of any province as a result of which that province would have a smaller number of members 
than any other province that according to the results of the then last decennial census did not have a larger population; 
but for the purposes of any subsequent readjustment of representation under this section any increase in 
the number of members of the House of Commons resulting from the application of this rule shall not be included 
in the divisor mentioned in rules one to four of this subsection. 
6. Such readjustment shall not take effect until the termination of the then existing Parliament. 
(2) The Yukon Territory as constituted by chapter forty-one of the statutes of Canada, 1901, shall be entitled 
to one member, and such other part of Canada not comprised within a province as may from time to time be 
defined by the Parliament of Canada shall be entitled to one member. 
Subsection 51(1) was re-enacted by the Constitution Act, 1974, S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 13, 
to read as follows: 

51. (1) The number of members of the House of Commons and the representation of the provinces therein 
shall upon the coming into force of this subsection and thereafter on the completion of each decennial census be 
readjusted by such authority, in such manner, and from such time as the Parliament of Canada from time to time 
provides, subject and according to the following Rules: 
1. There shall be assigned to Quebec seventy-five members in the readjustment following the completion of 
the decennial census taken in the year 1971, and thereafter four additional members in each subsequent readjustment. 
2. Subject to Rules 5(2) and (3), there shall be assigned to a large province a number of members equal to the 
number obtained by dividing the population of the large province by the electoral quotient of Quebec. 
3. Subject to Rules 5(2) and (3), there shall be assigned to a small province a number of members equal to the 
number obtained by dividing 
(a) the sum of the populations, determined according to the results of the penultimate decennial census, of the 
provinces (other than Quebec) having populations of less than one and a half million, determined according to 
the results of that census, by the sum of the numbers of members assigned to those provinces in the readjustment 
following the completion of that census; and 
(b) the population of the small province by the quotient obtained under paragraph (a). 
4. Subject to Rules 5(1)(a), (2) and (3), there shall be assigned to an intermediate province a number of members 
equal to the number obtained 
(a) by dividing the sum of the populations of the provinces (other than Quebec) having populations of less 
than one and a half million by the sum of the number of members assigned to those provinces under any of 
Rules 3, 5(1)(b), (2) and (3); 
(b) by dividing the population of the intermediate province by the quotient obtained under paragraph (a); and 
(c) by adding to the number of members assigned to the intermediate province in the readjustment following 
the completion of the penultimate decennial census one-half of the difference resulting from the subtraction of 
that number from the quotient obtained under paragraph (b). 
5. (1) On any readjustment, 
(a) if no province (other than Quebec) has a population of less than one and a half million, Rule 4 shall not be 
applied and, subject to Rules 5(2) and (3), there shall be assigned to an intermediate province a number of 
members equal to the number obtained by dividing 
(i) the sum of the populations, determined according to the results of the penultimate decennial census, of 
the provinces, (other than Quebec) having populations of not less than one and a half million and not more 
than two and a half million, determined according to the results of that census, by the sum of the numbers of 
members assigned to those provinces in the readjustment following the completion of that census, and 
(ii) the population of the intermediate province by the quotient obtained under subparagraph (i); 
(b) if a province (other than Quebec) having a population of 
(i) less than one and a half million, or 
(ii) not less than one and a half million and not more than two and a half million 
does not have a population greater than its population determined according to the results of the penultimate 
decennial census, it shall, subject to Rules 5(2) and (3), be assigned the number of members assigned to it in 
the readjustment following the completion of that census. 

(2) On any readjustment, 
(a) if, under any of Rules 2 to 5(1), the number of members to be assigned to a province (in this paragraph 
referred to as “the first province”) is smaller than the number of members to be assigned to any other province 
not having a population greater than that of the first province, those Rules shall not be applied to the first 
province and it shall be assigned a number of members equal to the largest number of members to be assigned 
to any other province not having a population greater than that of the first province; 
(b) if, under any of Rules 2 to 5(1)(a), the number of members to be assigned to a province is smaller than the 
number of members assigned to it in the readjustment following the completion of the penultimate decennial 
census, those Rules shall not be applied to it and it shall be assigned the latter number of members; 
(c) if both paragraphs (a) and (b) apply to a province, it shall be assigned a number of members equal to the 
greater of the numbers produced under those paragraphs. 
(3) On any readjustment, 
(a) if the electoral quotient of a province (in this paragraph referred to as “the first province”) obtained by 
dividing its population by the number of members to be assigned to it under any of Rules 2 to 5(2) is greater 
than the electoral quotient of Quebec, those Rules shall not be applied to the first province and it shall be assigned 
a number of members equal to the number obtained by dividing its population by the electoral quotient 
of Quebec; 
(b) if, as a result of the application of Rule 6(2)(a), the number of members assigned to a province under paragraph 
(a) equals the number of members to be assigned to it under any of Rules 2 to 5(2), it shall be assigned 
that number of members and paragraph (a) shall cease to apply to that province. 
6. 
(1) In these Rules, 
“electoral quotient” means, in respect of a province, the quotient obtained by dividing its population, determined 
according to the results of the then most recent decennial census, by the number of members to be assigned 
to it under any of Rules 1 to 5(3) in the readjustment following the completion of that census; 

“intermediate province” means a province (other than Quebec) having a population greater than its population 
determined according to the results of the penultimate decennial census but not more than two and a half million 
and not less than one and a half million; 

“large province” means a province (other than Quebec) having a population greater than two and a half million; 


“penultimate decennial census” means the decennial census that preceded the then most recent decennial census; 


“population” means, except where otherwise specified, the population determined according to the results of 
the then most recent decennial census; 

“small province” means a province (other than Quebec) having a population greater than its population determined 
according to the results of the penultimate decennial census and less than one and half million. 

(2) For the purposes of these Rules, 
(a) if any fraction less than one remains upon completion of the final calculation that produces the number of 
members to be assigned to a province, that number of members shall equal the number so produced disregarding 
the fraction; 
(b) if more than one readjustment follows the completion of a decennial census, the most recent of those readjustments 
shall, upon taking effect, be deemed to be the only readjustment following the completion of that census; 
(c) a readjustment shall not take effect until the termination of the then existing Parliament. 
Subsection 51(1) was re-enacted by the Constitution Act, 1985 (Representation), 

S.C. 1986, c. 8, Part I, as follows: 
51. (1) The number of members of the House of Commons and the representation of the provinces therein 
shall, on the coming into force of this subsection and thereafter on the completion of each decennial census, be 
readjusted by such authority, in such manner, and from such time as the Parliament of Canada from time to time 
provides, subject and according to the following rules: 
Rules 

1. 
There shall be assigned to each of the provinces a number of members equal to the number obtained by 
dividing the total population of the provinces by two hundred and seventy-nine and by dividing the population 
of each province by the quotient so obtained, counting any remainder in excess of 0.50 as one after the 
said process of division. 
2. 
If the total number of members that would be assigned to a province by the application of rule 1 is less 
than the total number assigned to that province on the date of coming into force of this subsection, there 
shall be added to the number of members so assigned such number of members as will result in the province 
having the same number of members as were assigned on that date. 
ENDNOTE 3 

FURTHER DETAILS OF CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867, SECTION 91 [FOOTNOTE (47)] 

Acts conferring legislative authority on Parliament: 

1. The Constitution Act, 1871, 34-35 Vict., c. 28 (U.K.): 
2. The Parliament of Canada may from time to time establish new Provinces in any territories forming for the 
time being part of the Dominion of Canada, but not included in any Province thereof, and may, at the time of 
such establishment, make provision for the constitution and administration of any such Province, and for the 
passing of laws for the peace, order, and good government of such Province, and for its representation in the said 
Parliament. 
3. The Parliament of Canada may from time to time, with the consent of the Legislature of any province of 
the said Dominion, increase, diminish, or otherwise alter the limits of such Province, upon such terms and conditions 
as may be agreed to by the said Legislature, and may, with the like consent, make provision respecting the 
effect and operation of any such increase or diminution or alteration of territory in relation to any Province affected 
thereby. 
4. The Parliament of Canada may from time to time make provision for the administration, peace, order, and 
good government of any territory not for the time being included in any Province. 
5. The following Acts passed by the said Parliament of Canada, and intituled respectively, — “An Act for the 
temporary government of Rupert’s Land and the North Western Territory when united with Canada”; and “An 
Act to amend and continue the Act thirty-two and thirty-three Victoria, chapter three, and to establish and pro-
vide for the government of “the Province of Manitoba”, shall be and be deemed to have been valid and effectual 
for all purposes whatsoever from the date at which they respectively received the assent, in the Queen’s name, of 
the Governor General of the said Dominion of Canada. 
6. Except as provided by the third section of this Act, it shall not be competent for the Parliament of Canada 
to alter the provisions of the last-mentioned Act of the said Parliament in so far as it relates to the Province of 
Manitoba, or of any other Act hereafter establishing new Provinces in the said Dominion, subject always to the 
right of the Legislature of the Province of Manitoba to alter from time to time the provisions of any law respecting the qualification of electors and members of the Legislative Assembly, and to make laws respecting elections 
in the said Province. 

The Rupert’s Land Act, 1868, 31-32 Vict., c. 105 (U.K.) (repealed by the Statute Law 
Revision Act, 1893, 56-57 Vict., c. 14 (U.K.)), had previously conferred similar authority 
in relation to Rupert’s Land and the North-Western Territory upon admission of 
those areas. 

2. The Constitution Act, 1886, 49-50 Vict., c. 35 (U.K.): 
1. The Parliament of Canada may from time to time make provision for the representation in the Senate and 
House of Commons of Canada, or in either of them, of any territories which for the time being form part of the 
Dominion of Canada, but are not included in any province thereof. 
3. The Statute of Westminster, 1931, 22 Geo. V, c. 4 (U.K.): 
3. It is hereby declared and enacted that the Parliament of a Dominion has full power to make laws having 
extra-territorial operation. 
4. Under section 44 of the Constitution Act, 1982, Parliament has exclusive authority 
to amend the Constitution of Canada in relation to the executive government of 
Canada or the Senate and House of Commons. Sections 38, 41, 42 and 43 of that Act 
authorize the Senate and House of Commons to give their approval to certain other 
constitutional amendments by resolution. 
ENDNOTE 4 

FURTHER DETAILS OF CONSTITUTION ACT, 1867, SECTION 93 [FOOTNOTE (50)] 

An alternative was provided for Manitoba by section 22 of the Manitoba Act, 1870, 
33 Vict., c. 3 (confirmed by the Constitution Act, 1871, 34-35 Vict., c. 28 (U.K.)), which 
section reads as follows: 

22. In and for the Province, the said Legislature may exclusively make Laws in relation to Education, subject 
and according to the following provisions: 
(1) Nothing in any such Law shall prejudicially affect any right or privilege with respect to Denominational 
Schools which any class of persons have by Law or practice in the Province at the Union: 
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Governor General in Council from any Act or decision of the Legislature of the 
Province, or of any Provincial Authority, affecting any right or privilege, of the Protestant or Roman Catholic 
minority of the Queen’s subjects in relation to Education: 
(3) In case any such Provincial Law, as from time to time seems to the Governor General in Council requisite 
for the due execution of the provisions of this section, is not made, or in case any decision of the Governor General 
in Council on any appeal under this section is not duly executed by the proper Provincial Authority in that 
behalf, then, and in every such case, and as far only as the circumstances of each case require, the Parliament of 
Canada may make remedial Laws for the due execution of the provisions of this section, and of any decision of 
the Governor General in Council under this section. 
An alternative was provided for Alberta by section 17 of the Alberta Act, 1905, 
4-5 Edw. VII, c. 3, which section reads as follows: 

17. Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867, shall apply to the said province, with the substitution for paragraph 
(1) of the said section 93 of the following paragraph: 
(1) Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect any right or privilege with respect to separate schools 
which any class of persons have at the date of the passing of this Act, under the terms of chapters 29 and 30 of 
the Ordinances of the Northwest Territories, passed in the year 1901, or with respect to religious instruction in 
any public or separate school as provided for in the said ordinances. 
2. In the appropriation by the Legislature or distribution by the Government of the province of any moneys 
for the support of schools organized and carried on in accordance with the said chapter 29 or any Act passed in amendment thereof, or in substitution therefor, there shall be no discrimination against schools of any class described 
in the said chapter 29. 

3. Where the expression “by law” is employed in paragraph 3 of the said section 93, it shall be held to mean 
the law as set out in the said chapters 29 and 30, and where the expression “at the Union” is employed, in the 
said paragraph 3, it shall be held to mean the date at which this Act comes into force. 
An alternative was provided for Saskatchewan by section 17 of the Saskatchewan 
Act, 1905, 4-5 Edw. VII, c. 42, which section reads as follows: 

17. Section 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867, shall apply to the said province, with the substitution for paragraph 
(1) of the said section 93, of the following paragraph: 
(1) Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect any right or privilege with respect to separate schools 
which any class of persons have at the date of the passing of this Act, under the terms of chapters 29 and 30 of 
the Ordinances of the Northwest Territories, passed in the year 1901, or with respect to religious instruction in 
any public or separate school as provided for in the said ordinances. 
2. In the appropriation by the Legislature or distribution by the Government of the province of any moneys 
for the support of schools organized and carried on in accordance with the said chapter 29, or any Act passed in 
amendment thereof or in substitution therefor, there shall be no discrimination against schools of any class described 
in the said chapter 29. 
3. Where the expression “by law” is employed in paragraph (3) of the said section 93, it shall be held to mean 
the law as set out in the said chapters 29 and 30; and where the expression “at the Union” is employed in the said 
paragraph (3), it shall be held to mean the date at which this Act comes into force. 
An alternative was provided for Newfoundland by Term 17 of the Terms of Union of 
Newfoundland with Canada (confirmed by the Newfoundland Act, 12-13 Geo. VI, c. 22 
(U.K.)). Term 17 of the Terms of Union of Newfoundland with Canada, set out in the 
penultimate paragraph of this note, was amended by the Constitution Amendment, 1998 
(Newfoundland Act) (see SI/98-25) and the Constitution Amendment, 2001 (Newfoundland 
and Labrador) (see SI/2001-117), and now reads as follows: 

17. (1) In lieu of section ninety-three of the Constitution Act, 1867, this term shall apply in respect of the 
Province of Newfoundland and Labrador. 
(2) In and for the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador, the Legislature shall have exclusive authority to 
make laws in relation to education, but shall provide for courses in religion that are not specific to a religious 
denomination. 
(3) Religious observances shall be permitted in a school where requested by parents. 
Prior to the Constitution Amendment, 1998 (Newfoundland Act), Term 17 of the 
Terms of Union of Newfoundland with Canada had been amended by the Constitution 
Amendment, 1997 (Newfoundland Act) (see SI/97-55) to read as follows: 

17. In lieu of section ninety-three of the Constitution Act, 1867, the following shall apply in respect of the 
Province of Newfoundland: 
In and for the Province of Newfoundland, the Legislature shall have exclusive authority to make laws in relation 
to education but 

(a) except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c), schools established, maintained and operated with public 
funds shall be denominational schools, and any class of persons having rights under this Term as it read on 
January 1, 1995 shall continue to have the right to provide for religious education, activities and observances 
for the children of that class in those schools, and the group of classes that formed one integrated school system 
by agreement in 1969 may exercise the same rights under this Term as a single class of persons; 
(b) subject to provincial legislation that is uniformly applicable to all schools specifying conditions for the 
establishment or continued operation of schools, 
(i) any class of persons referred to in paragraph (a) shall have the right to have a publicly funded denominational 
school established, maintained and operated especially for that class, and 




(ii) the Legislature may approve the establishment, maintenance and operation of a publicly funded school, 
whether denominational or non-denominational; 
(c) where a school is established, maintained and operated pursuant to subparagraph (b)(i), the class of persons 
referred to in that subparagraph shall continue to have the right to provide for religious education, activities 
and observances and to direct the teaching of aspects of curriculum affecting religious beliefs, student admission 
policy and the assignment and dismissal of teachers in that school; 
(d) all schools referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) shall receive their share of public funds in accordance with 
scales determined on a non-discriminatory basis from time to time by the Legislature; and 
(e) if the classes of persons having rights under this Term so desire, they shall have the right to elect in total 
not less than two thirds of the members of a school board, and any class so desiring shall have the right to elect 
the portion of that total that is proportionate to the population of that class in the area under the board’s jurisdiction. 
Prior to the Constitution Amendment, 1997 (Newfoundland Act), Term 17 of the 
Terms of Union of Newfoundland with Canada had been amended by the Constitution 
Amendment, 1987 (Newfoundland Act) (see SI/88-11) to read as follows: 

17. (1) In lieu of section ninety-three of the Constitution Act, 1867, the following term shall apply in respect 
of the Province of Newfoundland: 
In and for the Province of Newfoundland the Legislature shall have exclusive authority to make laws in relation 
to education, but the Legislature will not have authority to make laws prejudicially affecting any right or 
privilege with respect to denominational schools, common (amalgamated) schools, or denominational colleges, 
that any class or classes of persons have by law in Newfoundland at the date of Union, and out of public funds of 
the Province of Newfoundland, provided for education, 

(a) all such schools shall receive their share of such funds in accordance with scales determined on a nondiscriminatory 
basis from time to time by the Legislature for all schools then being conducted under authority 
of the Legislature; and 
(b) all such colleges shall receive their share of any grant from time to time voted for all colleges then being 
conducted under authority of the Legislature, such grant being distributed on a non-discriminatory basis. 
(2) For the purposes of paragraph one of this Term, the Pentecostal Assemblies of Newfoundland have in 
Newfoundland all the same rights and privileges with respect to denominational schools and denominational colleges 
as any other class or classes of persons had by law in Newfoundland at the date of Union, and the words 
“all such schools” in paragraph (a) of paragraph one of this Term and the words “all such colleges” in paragraph 
(b) of paragraph one of this Term include, respectively, the schools and the colleges of the Pentecostal 
Assemblies of Newfoundland. 
Term 17 of the Terms of Union of Newfoundland with Canada (confirmed by the 
Newfoundland Act, 12-13 Geo. VI, c. 22 (U.K.)), which Term provided an alternative 
for Newfoundland, originally read as follows: 

17. In lieu of section ninety-three of the Constitution Act, 1867, the following term shall apply in respect of 
the Province of Newfoundland: 
In and for the Province of Newfoundland the Legislature shall have exclusive authority to make laws in relation 
to education, but the Legislature will not have authority to make laws prejudicially affecting any right or 
privilege with respect to denominational schools, common (amalgamated) schools, or denominational colleges, 
that any class or classes of persons have by law in Newfoundland at the date of Union, and out of public funds of 
the Province of Newfoundland, provided for education, 

(a) all such schools shall receive their share of such funds in accordance with scales determined on a nondiscriminatory 
basis from time to time by the Legislature for all schools then being conducted under authority 
of the Legislature; and 
(b) all such colleges shall receive their share of any grant from time to time voted for all colleges then being 
conducted under authority of the Legislature, such grant being distributed on a non-discriminatory basis. 
See also sections 23, 29 and 59 of the Constitution Act, 1982. Section 23 provides for 
new minority language educational rights and section 59 permits a delay in respect of 
the coming into force in Quebec of one aspect of those rights. Section 29 provides that nothing in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate or dissentient schools. 


