THE CONSTITUTION OF GEORGIA
We, the citizens of Georgia, whose firm will is to establish a democratic social order, economic freedom, a rule-of-law based social state, to secure universally recognized human rights and freedoms, to enhance the state independence and peaceful relations with other people, based on the centuries-old traditions of statehood of the Georgian Nation and the historical-legal inheritance of the Constitution of Georgia of 1921, proclaim the present Constitution before the God and the Nation.
CHAPTER ONE General Provisions
Article 1
1. Georgia shall be an independent, unified and indivisible state, as confirmed by the Referendum of 31 March 1991, held throughout the territory of the country, including the Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic of Abkhazia and the Former Autonomous Region of South Ossetia and by the Act of Restoration of the State Independence of Georgia of 9 April 1991.
2. The form of political structure of the state of Georgia shall be a democratic republic.
3. “Georgia” shall be the name of the state of Georgia.
Article 2
1. The territory of the state of Georgia shall be determined as of 21 December 1991. The territorial integrity of Georgia and the inviolability of the state frontiers, being recognised by the world community of nations and international organisations, shall be confirmed by the Constitution and laws of Georgia.
2. The alienation of the territory of Georgia shall be prohibited. The state frontiers shall be changed only by a bilateral agreement concluded with the neighbouring State.
3. The territorial state structure of Georgia shall be determined by a Constitutional Law on the basis of the principle of circumscription of authorisation after the complete restoration of the jurisdiction of Georgia over the whole territory of the country.
4. The affairs of local importance shall be regulated by the Citizens of Georgia registered in the self-governing units through self-government, without the prejudice to the state sovereignty, according to the Georgian Legislation. The bodies of the state authority shall promote the development of the local self-government.
Article 3
1. The following shall fall within the exclusive competence of higher state bodies of Georgia:
a) legislation on Georgian citizenship, human rights and freedoms, emigration and immigration, entrance and leaving the country, temporary or permanent residence of citizens of foreign states and stateless persons in Georgia;
b) the status, boundary regime and defence of the state frontiers; the status and defence of territorial waters, airspace, the continental shelf and Exclusive Economic Zone;
c) state defence and security, armed forces, military industry and trade in arms;
d) the issues of war and peace, the determination of a legal regime of the state of emergency and the martial law and their introduction;
e) foreign policy and international relations;
f) foreign trade, customs and tariff regimes;
g) state finances and state loan; issuing money; legislation on banking, credit, insurance and taxes;
h) standards and models; geodesy and cartography; determination of the exact time; state statistics;
i) a unified energetic system and regime; communications; merchant fleet; ensigns; harbours of general state importance; airports and aerodromes; control of airspace, transit and air transport, registration of air transport; meteorological service; environmental observation system;
j) railways and motor roads of state importance;
k) piscary in ocean and high seas;
l) frontier-sanitary cordon;
m) legislation on pharmaceutical medicines;
n) legislation on accreditation of educational institutions and academic degrees; 
o) legislation on intellectual property;
p) legislation on trade law, criminal law, civil law, administrative law and labour law, penitentiary and procedures legislation.
q) criminal police and investigation;
r) legislation on land, subsoil and natural resources;
2. Issues falling within the joint competence shall be determined separately.
3. The status of the Autonomous Republic of Ajara shall be determined by the Constitutional Law of Georgia “On the Status of the Autonomous Republic of Ajara”.
Article 4
1. After the creation of appropriate conditions and formation of the bodies of local self-government throughout the whole territory of Georgia two chambers shall be set up within the Parliament of Georgia: the Council of Republic and the Senate.
2. The Council of Republic shall consist of members elected after a proportional system.
3. The Senate shall consist of members elected from Abkhazia, the Autonomous Republic of Ajara and other territorial units of Georgia and five members appointed by the President of Georgia.
4. The composition, authority and election procedure of the chambers shall be determined By the Organic Law.
Article 5
1. The people shall be the source of state authority in Georgia. The state authority shall be exercised within the framework established by the
Constitution.
2. The people shall exercise their authority through referendum, other forms of direct democracy and their representatives.
3. No one shall have the right to seize the authority or usurp it.
4. State authority shall be exercised on the basis of the principle of separation of powers.
Article 6
1. The Constitution of Georgia shall be the supreme law of the state. All other legal acts shall correspond to the Constitution.
2. The legislation of Georgia shall correspond to universally recognised principles and rules of international law. An international treaty or agreement of Georgia unless it contradicts the Constitution of Georgia, the Constitutional Agreement, shall take precedence over domestic normative acts.
Article 7
The state shall recognise and protect universally recognised human rights and freedoms as eternal and supreme human values. While exercising authority, the people and the state shall be bound by these rights and freedoms as directly acting law.
Article 8
The state language of Georgia shall be Georgian, and in Abkhazia - also Abkhazian.
Article 9
1. The state shall declare complete freedom of belief and religion, as well as shall recognise the special role of the Apostle Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia in the history of Georgia and its independence from the state.
2. The relations between the state of Georgia and the Apostle Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia shall be determined by the Constitutional Agreement. The Constitutional Agreement shall correspond completely to universally recognised principles and norms of international law, in particular, in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Article 10
Tbilisi shall be the capital of Georgia.
Article 11
The state symbols of Georgia shall be determined by the Organic Law.
CHAPTER TWO Citizenship of Georgia. Human rights and Freedoms.
Article 12
1. Georgian citizenship shall be acquired by birth and naturalisation.
2. A citizen of Georgia shall not at the same time be a citizen of another state, save in cases established by this paragraph. Citizenship of Georgia shall be granted by the President of Georgia to a citizen of foreign country, who has a special merit before Georgia or grant the citizenship of Georgia to him/her is due to State interests.
3. The procedure for the acquisition and loss of citizenship shall be determined by the Organic Law.
Article 13
1. Georgia shall protect its citizen regardless of his/her whereabouts.
2. No one shall be deprived of his/her citizenship.
3. The expulsion of a citizen of Georgia from Georgia shall be impermissible.
4. The extradition/transfer of a citizen of Georgia to the foreign state shall be impermissible, except for the cases prescribed by international treaty. A decision on extradition/transfer may be appealed in a court.
Article 14
Everyone is free by birth and is equal before law regardless of race, colour, language, sex, religion, political and other opinions, national, ethnic and social belonging, origin, property and title, place of residence.
Article 15
1. Everyone has the inviolable right to life and this right shall be protected by law.
2. Capital punishment is prohibited.
3. Physical or mental coercion of a person detained or otherwise restricted in his/her liberty is impermissible.
Article 16
Everyone has the right to free development of his/her personality.
Article 17
1. Honour and dignity of an individual is inviolable.
2. Torture, inhuman, cruel treatment and punishment or treatment and punishment infringing upon honour and dignity shall be impermissible.
Article 18
1. Liberty of an individual is inviolable.
2. Deprivation of liberty or other restriction of personal liberty without a court decision shall be impermissible.
3. An arrest of an individual shall be permissible by a specially authorised official in the cases determined by law. Everyone arrested or otherwise restricted in his/her liberty shall be brought before a competent court not later than 48 hours. If, within next 24 hours, the court fails to adjudicate upon the detention or another type of restriction of liberty, the individual shall immediately be released.
4. Deleted
5. An arrested or detained person shall be informed about his/her rights and the grounds for restriction of his/her liberty upon his/her arrest or detention. The arrested or detained person may request for the assistance of a defender upon his/her arrest or detention, the request shall be met.
6. Preliminary detention of the accused person shall not exceed 9 months.
7. The violation of the requirements of the present Article shall be punishable by law. A person arrested or detained illegally shall have the right to receive a compensation.
Article 19
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of speech, thought, conscience, religion and belief.
2. The persecution of a person on the account of his/her speech, thought, religion or belief as well as the compulsion to express his/her opinion about them shall be impermissible.
3. The restriction of the freedoms enumerated in the present Article shall be impermissible unless their manifestation infringes upon the rights of others.
Article 20
1. Everyone’s private life, place of personal activity, personal records, correspondence, communication by telephone or other technical means, as well as messages received through technical means shall be inviolable. Restriction of the aforementioned rights shall be permissible by a court decision or also without such decision in the case of the urgent necessity provided for by law.
2. No one shall have the right to enter the house and other possessions against the will of possessors, or conduct search unless there is a court decision or the urgent necessity provided for by law.
Article 21
1. The property and the right to inherit shall be recognized and guaranteed. The abrogation of the universal right to property, its acquisition and inheritance shall be impermissible.
2. Restriction of the rights referred to in the Paragraph 1 shall be permissible for the important social needs in the cases envisaged by the Law and in accordance with a procedure established, so that the nature of the property right is not infringed.
3. Deprivation of the property for the important social needs shall be permissible in the circumstances expressly defined by the law, under a court decision or in the case of the urgent necessity determined by the organic law, with condition of prior, full and fair compensation. Compensation shall be free from any taxes and fees.
1. The property and the right to inherit shall be recognized and guaranteed. The abrogation of the universal right to property, its acquisition and inheritance shall be impermissible.
2. Restriction of the rights referred to in the Paragraph 1 shall be permissible for the important social needs in the cases envisaged by the Law and in accordance with a procedure established, so that the nature of the property right is not infringed.
3. Deprivation of the property for the important social needs shall be permissible in the circumstances expressly defined by the law, under a court decision or in the case of the urgent necessity determined by the organic law, with condition of prior, full and fair compensation. Compensation shall be free from any taxes and fees.
1. The property and the right to inherit shall be recognized and guaranteed. The abrogation of the universal right to property, its acquisition and inheritance shall be impermissible.
2. Restriction of the rights referred to in the Paragraph 1 shall be permissible for the important social needs in the cases envisaged by the Law and in accordance with a procedure established, so that the nature of the property right is not infringed.
3. Deprivation of the property for the important social needs shall be permissible in the circumstances expressly defined by the law, under a court decision or in the case of the urgent necessity determined by the organic law, with condition of prior, full and fair compensation. Compensation shall be free from any taxes and fees.
Article 22
1. Everyone legally within the territory of Georgia shall, within throughout the territory of the country, have the right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose his/her residence.
2. Everyone legally within the territory of Georgia shall be free to leave Georgia.
3. These rights may be restricted only in accordance with law, in the interests of securing national security or public safety, protection of health, of 26
prevention of crime or administration of justice that is necessary for maintaining a democratic society.
4. A citizen of Georgia can freely enter Georgia.
Article 23
1. The freedom of intellectual creation shall be guaranteed. The right to intellectual property shall be inviolable.
2. Interference in creative process, censorship in the field of creative activity shall be impermissible.
3. The seizure of creative work and prohibition of its dissemination shall be impermissible unless it infringes upon the legal rights of others.
Article 24
1. Everyone has the right to freely receive and impart information, to express and impart his/her opinion orally, in writing or by in any other means.
2. Mass media shall be free. The censorship shall be impermissible.
3. Neither the state nor particular individuals shall have the right to monopolise mass media or means of dissemination of information.
4. The exercise of the rights enumerated in the first and second paragraphs of the present Article may be restricted by law on such conditions which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of ensuring state security, territorial integrity or public safety, for preventing of crime, for the protection of the rights and dignity of others, for prevention of the disclosure of information acknowledged as confidential or for ensuring the independence and impartiality of justice.
Article 25
1. Everyone except members of the armed forces, of the police and of the security office has the right to public assembly without arms either indoors or outdoors without prior permission.
2. The necessity of prior notification of the authorities may be established by law in the case where a public assembly or manifestation is held on a public thoroughfare.
3. Only the authorities shall have the right to brake up a public assembly or manifestation in case it assumes an illegal character.
Article 26
1. Everyone shall have the right to form and to join public associations, including trade unions.
2. Citizens of Georgia shall have the right to form a political party or other political association and participate in its activity in accordance with the Organic Law.
3. The formation and activity of such public and political associations aiming at overthrowing or forcibly changing the constitutional structure of Georgia, infringing upon the independence and territorial integrity of the country or propagandising war or violence, provoking national, local, religious or social animosity, shall be impermissible.
4. The creation of armed formations by public and political associations shall be impermissible.
5. A person who is enrolled in the personnel of the armed forces, state security offices or the forces of the bodies of internal affairs or a person having been designated as a judge or a prosecutor shall cease his/her membership of any political association.
6. Suspension or prohibition of the activity of public or political associations shall be possible only under a court decision, in the cases determined by the Organic Law and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law.
Article 27
The state shall be entitled to impose restriction on the political activity of citizens of a foreign country and stateless persons.
Article 28
1. Every citizen of Georgia who has attained the age of 18 shall have the right to participate in referendum or elections of state and self-government bodies. Free expression of the will of electors shall be guaranteed.
2. A citizen, who is recognised as legally incapable by a court or who is detained in a penitentiary institution following a conviction by a court, shall have no right to participate in elections and referendum.
Article 29
1. Every citizen of Georgia shall have the right to hold any state position if he/she meets the requirements established by legislation.
2. The conditions of public office shall be determined by law.
Article 30
1. Labour shall be free.
2. The state shall be bound to promote the development of free entrepreneurial activity and competition. Monopolistic activity shall be prohibited except for the cases permitted by law. The rights of consumers shall be protected by law.
3. On the basis of international agreements governing labour relations, the state shall protect the labour rights of the citizens of Georgia abroad.
4. The protection of labor rights, conditions to fair and safe, dignified labor, as well as labor conditions of women and juveniles shall be defined by organic law.
Article 31
The state shall take care for the equal socio-economic development of the whole territory of the country. With the view of ensuring the socioeconomic progress of the high mountain regions special privileges shall be determined by law.
Article 32
The state shall promote the unemployed citizen of Georgia to be employed. The conditions of the provision of a minimum standard of living and the status of the unemployed shall be determined by law.
Article 33
The right to strike shall be recognised. Procedure of exercising this right shall be determined by law. The law shall also establish the guarantees for the functioning of services of vital importance.
Article 34
1. The state shall promote the development of culture, the unrestricted participation of citizens in cultural life, expression and enrichment of cultural originality, recognition of national and common values and deepening of international cultural relations.
2. Every citizen of Georgia shall be obliged to care for the protection and preservation of the cultural heritage. The state shall protect the cultural heritage by law.
Article 34.1
The State shall facilitate the physical development of adults and youths by joint cooperation with educational institutions, sport unions by their involvement in sport activity.
Article 35
1. Everyone shall have the right to receive education and the right to free choice of a form of education.
2. The state shall ensure harmonization of the national educational system within the international educational space.
3. Pre-school education shall be guaranteed by the State. Elementary and basic education shall be compulsory. The state shall fully finance basic education as prescribed by law. Citizens shall have the right to receive State-financed vocational and higher education as prescribed by law.
4. The state shall support educational institutions in accordance with the procedure established by law.
Article 36
1. Marriage shall be based upon equality of rights and free will of spouses.
2. The state shall promote the prosperity of the family.
3. The rights of the mother and the child shall be protected by law.
Article 37
1. Everyone shall have the right to enjoy health insurance as a means of accessible medical aid. In the cases determined in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law, free medical aid shall be provided.
2. The state shall control all institutions of health protection and the production and trade of medicines.
3. Everyone shall have the right to live in healthy environment and enjoy natural and cultural surroundings. Everyone shall be obliged to care for natural and cultural environment.
4. With due regard to the interests of the current and future generations the State shall guarantee the protection of environment and the rational use of nature, sustainable development of the country according to the economic and ecological interests in order to ensure providing of safe environment for the individual.
5. Everyone shall have the right to receive a complete, objective and timely information about the state of environment.
Article 38
1. Citizens of Georgia shall be equal in social, economic, cultural and political life irrespective of their national, ethnic, religious or linguistic belonging. In accordance with universally recognised principles and rules of international law, they shall have the right to develop freely, without any discrimination and interference, their culture, to use their mother tongue in private and in public.
2. In accordance with universally recognised principles and rules of international law, the exercise of minority rights shall not oppose the sovereignty, state structure, territorial integrity and political independence of Georgia.
Article 39
The Constitution of Georgia shall not deny other universally recognised rights, freedoms and guarantees of an individual and a citizen, which are not referred to herein but stem inherently from the principles of the Constitution.
Article 40
1. An individual shall be presumed innocent until the commission of an offence by him/her is proved in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law and under a final judgment of conviction.
2. No one shall be obliged to prove his innocence. A burden of proof shall rest with the prosecutor.
3. A resolution on proceeding a person as an accused, a bill of indictment and a judgment of conviction shall be based only on the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. An accused shall be given the benefit of doubt in any event.
Article 41
1. Every citizen of Georgia shall have the right to become acquainted, in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law, with the information about him/her stored in state institutions as well as official documents existing there unless they contain state, professional or commercial secret.
2. The information existing on official papers pertaining to individual’s health, his/her finances or other private matters, shall not be accessible to anyone without the consent of the individual in question except in the cases determined by law, when it is necessary for ensuring the state security or public safety, for the protection of health, rights and freedoms of others.
Article 42
1. Everyone has the right to apply to a court for the protection of his/her rights and freedoms.
2. Everyone shall be tried only by a court under jurisdiction of which his/her case is.
3. The right to defence shall be guaranteed.
4. No one shall be convicted twice for the same crime.
5. No one shall be held responsible on account of an action, which did not constitute a criminal offence at the time it was committed. The law that neither mitigate nor abrogate responsibility shall have no retroactive force.
6. The accused shall have the right to request summonsing and interrogation of his/her witnesses under the same conditions as witnesses of the prosecution.
7. Evidence obtained in contravention of law shall have no legal force.
8. No one shall be obliged to testify against himself/herself or those relatives whose circle shall be determined by law.
9. Any person who has illegally sustained damage from the State, Autonomous Republics or self-government bodies and officials shall be guaranteed to receive full compensation accordingly from funds of the Sate, Autonomous Republics of self-government bodies through the court proceedings.
Article 43
1. The protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms within the territory of Georgia shall be supervised by the Public Defender of Georgia who shall be elected for a term of five years by the majority of the total number of the members of the Parliament of Georgia.
2. The Public Defender shall be authorised to reveal facts of the violation of human rights and freedoms and to report on them to corresponding bodies and officials. The creation of impediments to the activity of the Public Defender shall be punishable by law.
3. The authority of the Public Defender shall be determined by the Organic Law.
Article 44
1. Everyone residing in Georgia shall be obliged to observe the requirements of the Constitution and legislation of Georgia.
2. The exercise of the rights and freedoms of an individual shall not infringe upon the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 45
The basic rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution with due regard to their contents shall apply to legal entities as well.
Article 46
1. In case of a state emergency or martial law, the President of Georgia shall be authorised to restrict the rights and freedoms enumerated in
Articles 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 30, 33 and 41 of the Constitution either throughout the whole country or a certain part thereof. The President shall be obliged to submit the decision to the Parliament for approval within 48 hours.
2. In case of introduction of a state of emergency or martial law throughout the whole territory of the state, elections of the President of Georgia, the Parliament of Georgia or other representative bodies of Georgia shall be held upon the cancellation of the state. In case of introduction of a state of emergency in a certain part of the state the Parliament of Georgia shall adopt a decision on holding the elections throughout the other territories of the state.
Article 47
1. Foreign citizens and stateless persons residing in Georgia shall have the rights and obligations equal to the rights and obligations of citizens of Georgia with exceptions envisaged by the Constitution and law.
2. In accordance with universally recognised rules of international law, the procedure established by law, Georgia shall grant asylum to foreign citizens and stateless persons.
3. It shall be inadmissible to extradite/transfer an individual seeking a shelter, being persecuted for political creed or prosecuted for an action not regarded as a crime under the legislation of Georgia.
CHAPTER THREE: The Parliament of Georgia
Article 48
The Parliament of Georgia shall be the supreme representative body of the country, which shall exercise legislative power, determine the principle directions of domestic and foreign policy, exercise control over the activity of the Government within the framework determined by the Constitution and discharge other powers.
Article 48.1
1. The seat of the Parliament of Georgia shall be at the cities of Tbilisi and Kutaisi. The Plenary sessions of the Parliament shall be conducted only in the city of Kutaisi.
2. The temporary change of the seat of the Parliament of Georgia in the purpose of calling the sitting or session is permissible only in state of emergency and martial law.
Article 49
1. Before the creation of the appropriate conditions determined by the article 4 of the Constitution of Georgia the Parliament of Georgia shall consist of 75 members of the Parliament elected by a proportional system and 75 members of Parliament elected by a majority system for a term of four years on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. (12.03. 2008 N 5853 -I s)
2. A citizen, who has attained the age of 25, having the right to vote, may be elected a member of the Parliament.
3. The internal structure of the Parliament and procedure of its activity shall be determined by the Regulations of the Parliament.
4. The current expenditure for the Parliament of Georgia in the State Budget comparatively to the amount of budgetary means of the previous year may be reduced only by the prior consent of the Parliament. The Parliament shall adopt a decision itself on the distribution of the budgetary means of the Parliament in the State Budget.
Article 50
1. A political association of citizens registered in accordance with a procedure determined by law, the initiative of which is confirmed by the signatures of electors in accordance with the Organic Law of Georgia or which has a representative in the Parliament at the time elections are scheduled, shall have the right to stand for the elections. The number of the signatures of electors determined by the Organic Law of Georgia shall not exceed 1% of number of electors. Rules and conditions for participation in the election through the majoritarian system shall be determined by the election legislation (12.03. 2008 N 5853).
2. The mandates of the members of the Parliament shall be distributed only among those political associations and electoral blocks, which obtained at least seven per cent of the votes of the electors, participated in the elections held under the proportional system.
2.1. Regular parliamentary elections shall be held in October of the year when the Parliament’s term of office expires. The President of Georgia shall fix the date of elections within not later than 60 days before the elections.
3. If the date of holding the elections coincides with a state of emergency or martial law, the elections shall be held not later than 60 days after the state has been lifted. The President of Georgia shall fix the date of elections upon lifting of the state of emergency or martial law. In case of dissolution of the Parliament, extraordinary elections shall be held on the 60th day after enforcement of the order on the dissolution of the
Parliament, the date of which shall be fixed by the President of Georgia upon enforcement of the order on the dissolution of the Parliament.
3.1. The Parliament shall terminate the activity upon the enforcement of the order of the President on the dissolution of the Parliament. From the enforcement of the order of the President on the dissolution of the Parliament to the first convocation of the newly elected Parliament the dissolved Parliament shall assemble only in case of declaration of a state of emergency or martial law by the President to decide on the issues of prolongation or/and approval a state of emergency or martial law. In case the Parliament is not assembled within 5 days or does not approve (prolong) the order of the President on the declaration (prolongation) of a state of emergency, the announced state of emergency shall be cancelled. In case the Parliament does not approve the order of the President on the declaration (prolongation) of a state of martial law within 48 hours, the state of martial law shall be cancelled. Convocation of the Parliament shall not result in restoration of the offices and salaries of the members of the Parliament. The Parliament shall terminate an activity upon the adoption of a decision on the above mentioned issues.
4. The authority of the Parliament shall be terminated upon the first convocation of the newly elected Parliament.
5. The election procedure of a member of the Parliament as well as inadmissibility to stand for the elections shall be determined by the Constitution and the Organic Law.
Article 51
The first sitting of the newly elected Parliament of Georgia shall be held within 20 days after the elections. The day of the first sitting shall be scheduled by the President of Georgia. The Parliament shall begin its work if the authority of not less than two thirds of the members of the Parliament is confirmed.
Article 51.1
The Parliament shall be dissolved by the President only in cases determined by the Constitution, save for: 
a. Within 6 months after the preliminary elections, if the Parliament is not dissolved on the grounds provided by Article 80;
b. discharging of an authority determined by Article 63 of the Constitution by the Parliament;
c. in time of a state of emergency or martial law;
d. within 6 months of the tenure of the President, if the dismissal is not applied according to the art.80.
Article 52
1. A member of the Parliament of Georgia shall be a representative of the whole Georgia. He/she shall enjoy a free mandate and his/her recall shall be impermissible.
2. Arrest or detention of a member of the Parliament, the search of his/her apartment, car, workplace or his/her person shall be permissible only by the consent of the Parliament, except in the cases when he/she is caught flagrante delicto which shall immediately be notified to the Parliament. Unless the Parliament gives the consent, the arrested or detained member of the Parliament shall immediately be released.
3. A member of the Parliament shall have the right not to testify on the fact disclosed to him/her as to a member of the Parliament. Seizure of written materials connected with this matter shall be impermissible. The right shall also be reserved to a member of the Parliament after the termination of his/her office.
4. A member of the Parliament shall not be proceeded on the account of the ideas and opinions expressed by him/her in and outside the
Parliament while performing his/her duties.
5. The conditions of unimpeded exercise of the authority by a member of the Parliament shall be guaranteed. On the basis of the application of a member of the Parliament the state bodies shall ensure his/her personal security.
6. The creation of impediments to the discharge of the duties by a member of the Parliament shall be punishable by law.
Article 53
1. A member of the Parliament shall not be entitled to hold any position in public office or engage in an entrepreneurial activity. The conflict of interests shall be determined by law.
2. In case of a violation of the requirements set out in the preceding paragraph, the office of a member of the Parliament shall be terminated.
3. A member of the Parliament shall receive remuneration as determined by law.
Article 54
1. The Parliament shall decide about the issue of the recognition or pre-term termination of the office of a member of the Parliament. The decision of the Parliament may be appealed to the Constitutional Court.
2. The office of a member of the Parliament shall be pre-term terminated in the following cases:
a. resignation from office by a personal application;
b. a final judgment of conviction is rendered by a court against him/her;
c. recognition by a court as legally incapable, missing or dead;
d. occupation of a position or engagement in an activity incompatible with the status of a member of the Parliament;
e. loss of Georgian citizenship;
f. failure to participate in the work of the Parliament for a period of four months without a good reason;
g. death.
Article 55
1. The Parliament of Georgia for the term of its authority, in accordance with a procedure established by the Regulations of the Parliament shall elect the President and the Vice-Presidents of the Parliament by a secret ballot, inter alia, one from the members of the Parliament elected respectively in Abkhazia and the Autonomous Republic of Ajara upon the submission of the latter.
2. The President of the Parliament shall lead the work of the Parliament, ensure free expression of opinions, sign acts adopted by the Parliament, perform other authorities provided for by the Regulations of the Parliament.
3. A Vice-President shall perform the responsibilities of the President under the instructions of the latter, in case of inability of the President to discharge his/her authority or his/her dismissal.
4. The President of the Parliament shall exercise all administrative functions in the House of the Parliament in accordance with a procedure provided for by the Regulations of the Parliament.
Article 56
1. With the view of the preliminary preparation of the legislative issues, facilitating the implementation of decisions, controlling the activities of the bodies accountable before the Parliament and the Government Committees shall be set up in the Parliament for the term of its authority.
2. In cases prescribed by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedures of the Parliament, also by the request of at least one fifth of deputies, the investigative or other temporary commissions shall be established in the parliament. The decision on establishment of the commission shall be made according to the rules set by the regulations of the Parliament. Parliamentary majority shall not be more than half of the temporary commission.
3. At the request of the investigative commission, appearance before its sitting and submission of the documents necessary for examination of the issue shall be obligatory.
Article 57
1. With the view of organising the work of the Parliament, a Bureau of the Parliament shall be set up. It shall consist of the President of the Parliament of Georgia, the Vice-Presidents, Presidents of the Parliamentary Committees and Parliamentary Factions.
Article 58
1. The members of the Parliament shall be entitled to unite in a Parliamentary Faction. The number of the members of the Parliamentary Faction shall be not less than six. (10. 10. 2008. N 343)
2. The formation and functioning procedure of a faction and its authority shall be determined by law and the Regulations of the Parliament.
Article 59
1. A member of the Parliament shall be entitled to apply with a question to the body accountable to the Parliament, the Government, a member of the Government, head of executive organ of territorial unit of any level, the state institutions and receive answers from them.
2. A group of at least ten members of the Parliament or a Parliamentary Faction shall be entitled to apply with a question to anybody accountable to the Parliament, the Government, a particular member of the Government the latter being obliged to answer the raised questions at a sitting of the Parliament. The answer may become a matter of discussion of the Parliament.
3. The Parliament shall be authorized the raise a question of official liability of certain member of the Government before the Prime-Minister by majority of total amounts of the members of the Parliament.
Article 60
1. Sittings of the Parliament shall be public. Under the decision of the majority of the members of the Parliament present, the Parliament shall be entitled to declare a sitting or a part thereof closed while discussing a particular issue.
2. A member of the Government, an official elected, appointed or approved by the Parliament, shall be entitled and in case of request shall be obliged to attend the sittings of the Parliament, its Committee or Commission, to answer the raised questions at a sitting and submit an account of an activity. At a request such an official shall be heard by the Parliament, Committee or Commission.
3. Voting at the plenary session of the parliament shall be open or closed. Voting shall always be open except in the cases prescribed by the Constitution or law.
4. Recording notices of the open Parliamentary sessions are public.
Article 61
1. The Parliament of Georgia shall assemble ex officio for a regular session twice a year. The autumn session shall open on the first Tuesday of September and close on the third Friday of December. The spring session shall open on the first Tuesday of February and close on the last Friday of June.
2. The President of Georgia at the request of the Chairman of the Parliament, by no less than one-fourth of deputies of the Parliament, by request of the Government of Georgia shall between regular sessions, convene a special session of the Parliament and shall also convene a special sitting during a regular session. If the act of convocation has not been issued within 48 hours after submission of a written request, the Parliament shall start its works within following 48 hours in accordance with its Rules of Procedures.
3. Special sitting of the Parliament shall follow a specific agenda and it shall close upon the exhaustion of the agenda.
4. From the declaration of a state of emergency or martial law by the President, the Parliament shall assemble within 48 hours. The Parliament shall work until the end of the state.
Article 62
Decision of the Parliament on the issues of war and peace, state of emergency or martial law and issues determined by Article 46 of the Constitution shall be adopted by the majority of the total number of the members of the Parliament.
Article 63
1. In the cases envisaged in Paragraph 2 of Article 75, no less than one third of total members of the Parliament shall be authorized to start the case on dismissal of the President according to impeachment procedure. The question shall be delivered to the Constitutional Court of Georgia for conclusion.
2. If the Constitutional Court approves signs of corpus delicti in action of the President or violation of the Constitution, the Parliament shall discuss and vote the dismissal of the President according to impeachment procedures no later than 15 days after submission of the conclusion.
3. The President shall be deemed as dismissed via impeachment procedure, if this decision is supported by no less than two third of all members of the Parliament.
4. If the Parliament does not make the decision on dismissal of the President through impeachment procedure within the terms provided in Paragraph 2 hereof, commencement of impeachment procedure on the same question shall not be admitted.
5. Impeachment procedure should not be implemented during the state of emergency or wartime.
Article 64
1. In case of the violation of the Constitution or/and commitment of the criminal offences, not less than one third of the total number of the members of the Parliament shall be entitled to raise the question about the dismissal in accordance with impeachment procedure of the
President of the Supreme Court, members of the Government, the President of the Chamber of Control and members of the Council of National Bank. (10. 10. 2008. N 344)
2. After having received the conclusion in accordance with a procedure envisaged in the second paragraph of Article 63, the Parliament shall be authorised to dismiss the officials listed in the first paragraph of the present Article by the majority of the total number of the members of the Parliament. The requirements of the fourth paragraph of Article 63 shall apply to such cases as well.
Article 65
1. The Government of Georgia shall apply to the Parliament of Georgia on ratification, denunciation and termination of international treaties and agreements, and in cases provided by the Sub-paragraphs "a"-"c", Paragraph 2 hereof, as well in case if the agreement is executed by the President of Georgia - the President of Georgia,which requires countersignature by Prime-Minister.
2. Apart from the international treaties and agreements providing for ratification, it shall also be obligatory to ratify an international treaty and agreement which:
a. provides for accession of Georgia to an international organisation or intergovernmental union;
b. is of a military character;
c. pertains to the territorial integrity of the state or change of the state frontiers;
d. is related to borrowing or lending loans by the state;
e. requires a change of domestic legislation, adoption of necessary laws and acts with force of law with the view of honouring the undertaken international obligations.
3. The Parliament shall be notified about the conclusion of other international treaties and agreements.
4. In case of lodging a constitutional claim or a submission with the Constitutional Court, ratification of the respective international treaty or agreement shall be impermissible before adjudication by the Constitutional Court.
Article 66
1. A draft law or a draft resolution shall be deemed to be adopted if it is supported by the majority of the members of the Parliament present, but not be less than one third of the total number of the members of Parliament unless the Constitution determines another procedure for the adoption of the draft law or draft resolution.
1.1. A Constitutional Agreement shall be deemed approved if it is supported by not less than three-fifth of the total number of the members of the Parliament.
2. A draft Organic Law shall be deemed adopted if it is supported by more than half of the number of the members of the Parliament on the current nominal list.
3. The consent of the Parliament shall be adopted in the form of a resolution unless another procedure is defined by the Constitution.
4. The procedure for the adoption of other decisions shall be defined by the Regulations of the Parliament.
Article 67
1. The Government, a member of the Parliament, a Parliamentary Faction, a Parliamentary Committee, the high representative bodies of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia and the Autonomous Republic of Adjara, no less than 30 000 electors, shall have the right to the legislative initiative.
2. At the request of the Government, the Parliament shall discuss a draft law in an unscheduled manner.
Article 68
1. A draft law adopted by the Parliament shall be submitted to the President of Georgia within a term of seven days.
2. The President shall sign and promulgate the law within a term of ten days or return it to the Parliament with reasoned remarks.
3. If the President returns the draft law to the Parliament, the latter shall put to the vote the remarks of the President. For the adoption of the remarks the same number of votes shall suffice as determined for this kind of draft law by Article 66 of the Constitution. If the remarks are adopted, the final redaction of the draft law shall be submitted to the President who shall sign and promulgate it within a term of seven days.
4. If the Parliament rejects the remarks of the President, the initial draft shall be put to vote. A law shall be deemed to be adopted if it is supported by more than half of the listed number of the members of the Parliament. The organic law shall be deemed adopted if it is supported by more than half of the total composition of the parliament. The constitutional law shall be deemed as adopted if it is supported by no less than two thirds of the total number of the members of the Parliament.
5. If the President fails to promulgate the draft law within the defined term, the President of the Parliament shall sign and promulgate it.
6. A law shall enter into force on the fifteenth day after its official promulgation unless another term is defined.
CHAPTER FOUR: The President of the Republic.
Article 69
1. The President of Georgia is the Head of the State of Georgia, the guarantor of national independence and unity of the country. The President of Georgia shall provide functioning of the State organs within the scope of authorities entitled by the Constitution.
2. The President of Georgia is the supreme Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of Georgia.
3. The President of Georgia represents Georgia in foreign relations.
Article 70
1. The President of Georgia shall be elected on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for a term of five years. The same person may be elected the President only for two consecutive terms.
2. Any person may be elected as the President of Georgia if he/she is a citizen of Georgia by birth, has the right to vote, has attained the age of 35, has lived in Georgia for at least 15 years and has resided in Georgia for last 3 years by the Election Day.
3. The right to nominate a candidate to the office of the President shall be vested with a political association of citizens or a stirring group.
The nomination shall be confirmed by the signatures of the electors determined by the Organic Law of Georgia. The number of the signatures of the electors determined by the Organic Law shall not exceed 1% of the number of electors. (12.03. 2008 N 5853)
4. A candidate shall be deemed to be elected if he/she has obtained more than half of the votes of participants. (6.02.2004.N3272)
5. If no candidate has received the required number of votes in the first round, a second round of elections shall be held in two weeks after an official announcement of the first round results. (27.12.06)
6. Two candidates having the best results in the first round shall be put to the vote in the second round. The candidate who received more votes shall be deemed to be elected. (6.02.2004.N3272)
7. If only one candidate took part in the first round, who did not receive the necessary number of votes, new elections shall be held within two months from the date of elections.
8. No election shall be held in case of a state of emergency or martial law.
9. Regular elections for Presidency shall be held in October of the calendar year when the presidential authority expires. The President of
Georgia shall fix the date of the elections not later than within 60 days before the elections. (27.12.06)
Article 71
1. Before taking up office the new President shall make a programme speech and take the following oath:
“I, the President of Georgia, before the God and the Nation, declare to observe the Constitution of Georgia, defend the independence, unity and indivisibility of the country, to perform faithfully the duties of the President, to take care for the security and welfare of the citizens of my country and for the revival and might of my Nation and Fatherland”.
2. The ceremony envisaged in the first paragraph shall take place on the third Sunday after the day of the election of the President. Tenure of the president terminates upon the inauguration of the newly elected president
Article 72
The President of Georgia may not hold any other position, including in a political party, conduct any entrepreneurial activities and receive salary or any permanent remuneration for any other activities.
Article 73
1. The President of Georgia shall:
a) negotiate with the foreign states and conclude international conventions and agreements under the consent of the Government; appoint and dismiss the ambassadors and other diplomatic representatives of Georgia upon recommendation of the Government; receive accreditation from the ambassadors and other diplomatic representatives of foreign states and international organizations under the consent of the government.
b) conclude a constitutional agreement with the Apostle Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia on behalf of the state of Georgia.
c) In the cases provided by the Constitution, nominate the candidature of Prime-Minster and appoint the Prime-Minister.
d) Oblige the Government to perform its duties till confirmation of a new Government in the cases provided by the Constitution.
e) Submits to the Parliament, appoints, dismisses and removes the officials in the cases provided by the Constitution; appoints the members of the Supreme Court of Justice according to the procedures defined by law, on the basis of rules prescribed by the organic law participates in the appointment of chairman and members of the Central Electoral Commission, under the consent of the government submits members of the national regulatory bodies to the Parliament of Georgia.
f) Within 10 days after the recognition of competence of the newly elected Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara after consultations with the political parties represented in the Council, under the consent of the Government, proposes candidature of the chairman of the government of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara.
g) declare a martial law in the case of armed attack on Georgia, make peace when appropriate conditions exist and submit the decisions to the Parliament within 48 hours for approval.
h) in the case of war or mass disorder, infringement upon the territorial integrity of the country, coup d'état, armed insurrection, ecological disasters, epidemics or in other cases, when state bodies are unable to normally exercise their Constitutional powers, shall declare a state of emergency throughout the whole territory of the country or a certain part thereof and submit this decision to the Parliament within 48 hours for approval. Emergency authorities shall apply only to the territory where the state of emergency is declared for the reasons mentioned in the present paragraph.
i) In the case of a state of emergency issue the decrees having the force of law, which shall remain in force until the end of the state of emergency, shall take emergency measures. The decrees shall be submitted to the Parliament when it is assembled.
j) By the submission of the government, with the consent of the Parliament, be entitled to suspend the activity of the institutions of self-government or other representative bodies of territorial units or dismiss them if their activity endangers the sovereignty, territorial integrity of the country or the exercise of constitutional authority of state bodies.
k) Issues a decree, ordnance and directive, also order, as the Commander-in-Chief of the Georgian Armed Forces, for implementation of powers conferred by the Constitution.
l) sign and promulgate laws in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Constitution.
m) decide about the matters of citizenship, granting asylum.
n) award state honors, higher military ranks, special and honorary titles and higher diplomatic ranks.
o) grant pardon to convicted persons.
p) dissolve the Parliament in accordance with a procedure and in the cases established by the Constitution.
2. The President of Georgia shall schedule the date of elections of the President, Parliament and representative bodies in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
3. The President of Georgia shall appoint the members of the National Security Council.
Appoints and dismisses the Chief of the Headquarter of the Armed Forces of Georgia, other commanders under the consent of the Government.
4. The President shall be authorized to address the people and the Parliament. Once a year he/she shall submit a report to the Parliament on the most important state issues.
5. The President of Georgia carries out other authorities defined by the Constitution.
Article 73.1
1. Legal acts of the President of Georgia shall be countersigned by the Prime-Minister, except the acts issued during the State of War and the cases envisaged by the paragraphs 2 and 4 of this article.
2. Order of the President shall not require countersignature except in the cases directly prescribed by the Constitution.
3. The countersignature shall not be required for those legal acts of the President of Georgia which according to the Constitution, are promulgated by the submission of the Government or which have the preliminary consent of the Government.
4. The countersignature shall not be required for those legal acts which relate to:
a) Appointment of elections and dissolution of the Parliament on the basis of article 80, convocation of the first sitting of newly elected Parliament, also convocation of the special sitting or session of the Parliament;
b) Signing of laws and their promulgation, also return of a draft law with remarks to the Parliament;
c) appointment, submission and dismissal of officials prescribed by the Constitution, unless the Constitution defines otherwise;
d) Appeal to the Court or the Constitutional Court;
e) Nominating a candidate of the Prime-Minister and appointment of the Prime-Minister;
f) imposing temporary obligations on the Government in line with Paragraph 1 of Article 80 of the Constitution;
g) granting State Rewards and special ranks;
h)Granting and termination of citizenship;
i) Request on convocation of sitting of the Government according to the procedure provided by Paragraph 6 of Article 78;
j) activities of the Administration of the President and National Security Council;
k) Declaration or revocation of State of War;
l) Pardoning of convicted;
5. Legal act of the President, which requires countersigning, is promulgated, and has legal results only in case of countersigning.
6. In case of countersigning, the liability on legal acts shall be imposed to the Government.
Article 74
1. The President of Georgia shall be entitled to appoint the referendum on the issues defined under Constitution and the Law by the demand of the Parliament of Georgia, the Government of Georgia and no less than 200 000 electors, within the period of 30 days after reception of demand on its appointment.
2. The referendum shall not be held with the view of adopting or repealing law, in terms of amnesty or pardon, ratification or denunciation of international treaties and agreements, as well as the issues restricting the basic constitutional rights and freedoms of individuals.
3. Issues related to the scheduling and holding referendum shall be determined by the Organic Law.
Article 75
1. The President of Georgia shall enjoy personal immunity. While holding his/her position, his/her detention or proceeding shall be impermissible.
2. In case of violation of the Constitution and existence of signs of corpus delicti in the actions of the President, the Parliament shall be authorized to dismiss the President in accordance with a procedure prescribed by Article 63 of the Constitution and the Law.
Article 76
Deleted (10. 10. 2008. N 344) Deleted (10. 10. 2008. N 344) Deleted (10. 10. 2008. N 344) Deleted (10. 10. 2008. N 344)
1. In case of inability to discharge the authority of the President of Georgia or pre-term termination of his/her office, the President of the Parliament shall exercise the responsibilities of the President of Georgia, whereas in case the President of the Parliament is unable to discharge the authority of the President of Georgia, as well as if the Parliament is dissolved the Prime Minister shall exercise the responsibilities of the President of Georgia. During the period of discharging the authority of the President of Georgia by the President of the Parliament, one of the Vice-Presidents shall perform the duties of the President of the Parliament. During the period of discharging the authority of the President of Georgia by the Prime Minister a member of the Government having the authority of the first Vice-Prime Minister shall perform the duties of the Prime Minister. (11.03.2008 N 5833)
2. Executor of duties of the President shall not be authorized to use the rights prescribed by Sub-paragraph "i", Paragraph 1, Article 73 and Paragraph 1, Article 74, also to dismiss the Parliament.
3. The presidential election shall be held within 45 days after the termination of the office of the President. The Parliament shall ensure the holding of election.
Article 76.1
Deleted (10. 10. 2008. N 344)
Article 77
The administration of the President of Georgia shall be established on purpose to promote the exercise of the authority of the President of Georgia. The President of Georgia shall appoint and dismiss the head of the administration of the President of Georgia, determine a structure and a procedure of activity of the administration.
CHAPTER FOUR - 1 : The Government of Georgia
2.1. The rules of charging to exercise the responsibilities of the first Vice-Prime and the Vice-prime shall be determined by the Law. (added by the amendment 11.03.2008 N 5833)
3. The Government shall adopt a decree and a resolution on the basis of the constitution, laws and the normative acts of the President and for their realisation thereof, which shall be signed by the Prime Minister.
4. The President of Georgia shall be authorised to convene and preside over the sittings of the Government with regard to the issues of exclusive state importance. Decision adopted at the sitting shall be formed by the act of the President.
5. The structure, authority, and a procedure of the activity of the Government shall be determined by the Constitution and law, the draft of which shall be submitted to the Parliament by the Government by the consent of the President.
Text prior to new Chapter 4.1 of the 6 February 2004
1. By the submission of the President the Parliament confirms the structure and the right of activity of the executive.
2. The armed forces, state security forces, and the police shall not be united.
Article 78
1. The Government of Georgia is the supreme body of the executive branch, which exercises domestic and foreign policy of the State. The Government is ac countable before the President.
2. The Government shall be composed by the Prime-Minister and the Ministers. State Minister or State Ministers may be part of the composition of the Government.
3. The Prime-Minister may designate a member of the Government as the first Vice-Prime Minister and may also designate member(s) of the Government as Vice Prime Minister(s).
4. Prime-Minister and Ministers represent Georgia in foreign relations within the scope of their competence.
5. The Government shall adopt a decree and a resolution under and for the purposes of implementation of the Constitution and legal acts, which shall be signed by the Prime-Minister.
6 .The President of Georgia shall be authorized to demand for discussion of specific issues at the Government sitting and to participate in discussion of those issues at the Government sitting that is attended by the Secretary and other members of the National Security Council.
7 .Structure, Authority and procedures of actions of the Government shall be defined by the Law. The Government shall submit this draft law to the Parliament.
8 .The authority of the Government shall begin upon the appointment of the members of the Government in accordance with a procedure and in cases established by the Constitution.
Article 79
1. The Prime Minister is the head of the Government.
2. The Prime Minister shall define the directions of the activity of the Government, organize the activities of the Government, coordinate and control over the activities of the members of the Government.
3. At the request of the Parliament the Prime Minister shall submit an account to it on the realization of the governmental program.
4. The Prime Minister within his/her authority shall issue an individual legal act- an order, exercise full administrative functions in the building of the Government as well.
5. The Prime Minister shall appoint and dismiss members of the Government.
6. The Prime Minister shall appoint and dismiss other officials in accordance with a procedure and in cases envisaged by law.
7. Resignation of the Prime-Minister or termination of his/her authority shall result in termination of authority of other members of the Government. In case of resignation or dismissal of other member of the Government the Prime-Minister shall appoint a new member of the Government within two weeks.
Article 80
1. After the approval of the newly-elected Parliament, the Government shall be deemed as dismissed and the President of Georgia shall authorize the same Government to perform its duties until formation of a new Government.
2. Within 7 days after the dismissal of the Government, the President of Georgia shall nominate a candidate of Prime-Minister proposed by the political group with the best results in the Parliamentary elections.
3. The candidate for the Prime-Minister shall, within 7 days, nominate the candidates of Ministers and present the composition of the
Government to the Parliament of Georgia for the vote of confidence, The Government program should be submitted together with composition of the Government.
4. The Parliament of Georgia shall, within 7 days after submission of composition of the Government, discuss and vote the question of confidence for the composition of the Government. Support of majority of the enlisted members of the Parliament shall be required to receive the vote of confidence of the Parliament
5. In case the Government does not receive the vote of confidence, a revised voting shall be held within 30 days after submission of composition of the Government to the Parliament in relation with the vote of confidence towards the initially submitted or revised composition of the Government.
6. If a candidate of the Prime-Minister is not presented or the Parliament does not grant the vote of confidence to the Government and its program in compliance with the procedure prescribed by paragraph 5, the President shall, within 7 days, nominate a Prime-Minister from the candidates proposed by no less than two fifth of the enlisted members of the Parliament. If 2 candidates have been proposed by different compositions of the members of the Parliament, the President shall nominate the candidate proposed by the majority, and in case the candidates are nominated by equal number of the members of the Parliament, the President shall nominate either candidate.
7. In the case prescribed by the Paragraph 6 hereunder, selection of the members of the Government and granting of vote of confidence to the composition of the Government shall be carried out according to the procedure provided by the Paragraphs 3-4 hereunder. If the Parliament fails to grant the vote of confidence to the composition of the Government, the President of Georgia shall, within 3 days, dissolve the Parliament and appoint by-elections.
8. The President of Georgia shall, within 2 days after granting the vote of confidence to the composition of Government, nominate a Prime-
Minister, and the Prime-Minister shall, within 2 days, nominate other members of Government. If the President fails to issue the legal act on appointment of the Prime-Minister, he/she shall be deemed as appointed.
Article 80.1
1. In case of resignation of the Government or dissolution of authority of the Prime-Minister, The President of Georgia shall, within 7 days, nominate a candidate of Prime-Minister submitted by the Parliamentary majority, or if such majority is not formed yet, the Parliamentary faction in which the most members of the Parliament are included.
2. Selection and granting of vote of confidence to the members of the Parliament shall be carried out according to the procedure provided by the Paragraphs 3-8 of Article 80
3. In case of the circumstances provided by Paragraph 1 hereunder, the President of Georgia shall impose the obligations to the same composition of Government till formation of new Government.
Article 81
1. The Parliament shall be entitled to declare non-confidence to the Government. No less than two fifth of the total members of the Parliament shall be entitled to raise a question of non-confidence. The voting in relation to non-confidence shall be held not earlier than twenty and no later than twenty-five days. The question of non-confidence shall be deemed as started if more than half of members of the Parliament support this decision. If the Parliament does not make the decision on raising of question of non-confidence, appealing to the Parliament on raising of the question of non-confidence by the same members of the Parliament, within 6 months after voting, shall not be admitted.
2. The Parliament shall, not earlier than 20 days and no later than 25 days after commencement of discussion of non-confidence, vote to submission of the candidate of the Prime-Minster nominated by at least two-fifths of the members of enlisted composition of the Parliament to the President. If 2 candidates are nominated according to the procedures of this paragraph, both of them shall be put to the vote. A candidate of Prime-Minister shall be submitted to the President if voted by more than half of the members of the Parliament; non-submission of a candidature of Prime-Minster under the procedure of this paragraph means termination of the non-confidence procedure.
3. The President shall be authorized to, within 5 days after submission of the candidate of Prime-Minister, nominate a candidate of Prime-Minister or to refuse the nomination of the submitted candidate. If the President nominates the candidate submitted by the Parliament, confidence shall be declared to new composition of the Government according to the procedure provided by the Paragraphs 3-4, Article 80;
4. If the President refuses nomination of the candidate of Prime-Minister presented to him by the Parliament in the case provided by the Paragraph 3, the Parliament shall be authorized to vote for submission of the same candidate of Prime-Minister to the President no earlier than 20 and no later than 25 days after submission of the candidate. If submission is not supported by three fifth of the members of the Parliament, the President shall be obliged to nominate the candidate of Prime-Minister submitted to him within 3 days. Declaration of confidence to new composition of the Government shall be carried out according to Paragraphs 3-4 of Article 80.
5. Declaration of confidence by the Parliament to the new composition of the Government according to the procedure prescribed by Paragraphs 3 or 4 hereunder shall be deemed as declaration of non-confidence to the government, causing dissolution of its authorities. Appointment of new Prime-Minister and Government shall be carried out according to Paragraph 8, Article 80.
6. In case of declaration of non-confidence by the Parliament to new composition of Government according to the procedure prescribed by Paragraphs 3 or 4 hereunder, the President shall be authorized to dismiss the Parliament and appoint by-elections within three days.
Article 81.1
1. The Prime-Minister shall be entitled to raise before the Parliament the question of confidence of the Government in relation to the initiated draft law.
2. The Parliament shall vote to the draft law within 14 days after raising the question provided by the Paragraph 1 hereunder. The draft law shall be adopted by one hearing according to the procedure prescribed by article 66 in accordance with the procedure of adoption of a category of law in question.
3. If the draft law is not adopted, this shall be deemed as the decision of raising question of non-confidence provided by the Paragraph 1, Article 81 and the procedures prescribed by paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 81 shall be continued.
4. A draft law shall be deemed adopted, if the Parliament does not declare non -confidence within the terms and conditions provided by paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 81.
Article 81.2
1. Ministries shall be created with the view of ensuring state government and state policy in particular field of state and public life.
2. Ministry shall be headed by a Minister who shall adopt decisions independently on the matters falling within his/her competence. A Minister shall issue orders on the basis of law, normative act of the President or resolution of the Government and with the view of implementing them.
3. The State Minister shall be appointed in accordance with a procedure established by the Constitution with the view of fulfilling the state objects of exclusive importance.
4. A member of the Government shall not have the right to hold any position, except for a party position, either establish an enterprise, engage in entrepreneurial activity or receive a salary from any other activity, with the exception of scientific and pedagogical activity.
5. A member of the Government shall be entitled to resign.
Article 81.3
1. The executive branch is represented by the State Envoy-Governor in the administrative-territorial units of Georgia.
2. Authority of State Envoy-Governor shall be defined by the Law.
3. The Government appoints and dismisses the State Envoy-Governor.
Article 81.4
(added by the amendment 10. 10. 2008. N 344)
Departments of the prosecution are under the system of the ministry of Justice. The Minister of Justice is overseeing their operations. The rights, responsibilities, and operations of the prosecution office are defined by the law.
CHAPTER FIVE: The Judiciary
Article 82
1. Judicial power shall be exercised by means of constitutional control, justice and other forms determined by law.
2. Acts of courts shall be obligatory for all state bodies and persons throughout the whole territory of the country.
3. The judiciary shall be independent and exercised exclusively by courts.
4. A court shall adopt a judgment in the name of Georgia.
5. The cases shall be considered by juries before the courts of general jurisdiction in accordance with a procedure and in cases prescribed by law.
Article 83
1. The Constitutional Court of Georgia shall be the judicial body of Constitutional review. Its authority, the procedures of its creation and activity shall be determined by the Constitution and the Organic Law.
2. Justice shall be administered by general courts. Their system shall be determined by an organic law. 
3. Introduction of a court martial shall be permissible at war and exclusively within the system of the courts of general jurisdiction.
4. Creation of either extraordinary or special courts shall be prohibited.
Article 84
1. A judge shall be independent in his/her activity and shall be subject only to the Constitution and law. Any pressure upon the judge or interference in his/her activity with the view of influencing his/her decision shall be prohibited and punishable by law.
2. The removal of a judge from the consideration of a case, his/her pre-term dismissal or transfer to another position shall be permissible only in the circumstances determined by law.
3. No one shall have the right to demand from a judge an account as to a particular case.
4. All acts restricting the independence of a judge shall be annulled.
5. Only a court shall be authorised to repeal, change or suspend a court judgment in accordance with a procedure determined by law.
Article 85
1. Cases before a court shall be considered at an open sitting. The consideration of a case at a closed sitting shall be permissible only in the circumstances provided for by law. A court judgment shall be delivered publicly.
2. Legal proceedings shall be conducted in the state language. An individual not having a command of the state language shall be provided with an interpreter. In the districts, where the population does not have a command of the state language, teaching of the state language and solution of the issues related to the legal proceedings shall be ensured.
3. The legal proceedings shall be exercised on the basis of equality of parties and the adversarial nature of the proceedings.
Article 86
1. A citizen of Georgia who has attained the age of 30 has relevant higher legal education and has at least 5 year-working experience in the legal area is eligible to hold the judicial office.
2. Judges are life-time appointed, unless they reach the age determined by the Law. Before life-time appointment of the judge, the Law may envisage the appointment of the judge for definite period, no more than 3 years. The rules on selection, appointment or dismissal of judges are defined by the organic law.
3. The position of a judge shall be incompatible with any other occupation and remunerative activity, except for a pedagogical activity. A judge shall not be a member of a political party or participate in a political activity.
Article 86.1
1. The Supreme Council of Justice of Georgia shall be set up to appoint and dismiss judges from/to office and for other purposes.
2. Half of the Supreme Council of Justice of Georgia shall be composed of members elected by a self-government body of the judges of general courts of Georgia. Chairperson of the Supreme Court of Georgia shall chair the Supreme Council of Justice of Georgia.
3. Powers and a setting up procedure of the Supreme Council of Justice of Georgia shall be determined by an organic law.
Article 87
1. A judge shall enjoy personal immunity. Criminal proceeding of a judge, his/her arrest or detention, the search of his/her apartment, car, workplace or his/her person shall be permissible by the consent of the President of the Supreme Court of Georgia, except when he/she is caught flagrante delicto, which shall immediately be notified to the President of the Supreme Court of Georgia. Unless the President of the Supreme Court gives his/her consent to the arrest or detention, the arrested or detained judge shall immediately be released.
2. The state shall ensure the security of a judge and his/her family.
Article 88
1. The Constitutional Court of Georgia shall exercise the judicial power by virtue of the constitutional legal proceedings.
2. The Constitutional Court of Georgia consists of 9 judges - the members of the Constitutional Court. 3 members of the court are appointed by the President of Georgia, 3 members are elected by more than half of enlisted composition of the Parliament, 3 members - by the Supreme Court. Validity of authority of the Constitutional Court is 10 years. The Constitutional Court elects its chairman from its composition for the period of 5 years.
3. A member of the Constitutional Court shall not be a person who has held this position before.
4. A member of the Constitutional Court may be a citizen of Georgia who has attained the age of 35 and has the higher legal education. The
selection, appointment and election procedure and the issue of termination of the office of the members of the Constitutional Court as well as other issues of the constitutional legal proceeding and the activity of the Constitutional Court shall be determined by law.
5. A member of the Constitutional Court shall enjoy personal immunity. A member of the Constitutional Court shall not be proceeded, arrested or detained, nor shall his/her apartment, car, workplace or his/her person be subject to search without the consent of the Constitutional Court, except when he/she is caught flagrante delicto, which shall immediately be notified to the Constitutional Court. Unless the Constitutional Court gives its consent to the arrest or detention, an arrested or detained member shall immediately be released.
Article 89
The Constitutional Court of Georgia on the basis of a constitutional claim or a submission of the President of Georgia, the Government, not less than one fifth of the members of the Parliament, a court, the higher representative bodies - representative organs of the self-government
- the City Council (Sakrebulo), the High Council of Justice of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia and the Autonomous
Republic of Ajara, the Public Defender or a citizen in accordance with a procedure established by the Organic Law shall:
a. adjudicate upon the constitutionality of a Constitutional Agreement, law, normative acts of the President and the Government, the normative acts of the higher state bodies of the Autonomous Republic Abkhazia and the Autonomous Republic of Ajara (changes are added by the Constitutional Laws of Georgia of 20 April 2000 and 30 March 2001);
b. consider dispute on competence between state bodies;
c. consider constitutionality of formation and activity of political associations of citizens;
d. consider dispute on constitutionality of referenda and elections;
e. consider constitutionality of international treaties and agreements;
f. consider on the basis of a constitutional claim of a citizen constitutionality of normative acts in terms of the issues of Chapter Two of the Constitution;
f.1 consider dispute on violation of the Constitutional Law of Georgia on the Status of the Autonomous Republic of Ajara.
f.2 . On the basis of the action brought by representative bodies of the self-government - the City Council (Sakrebulo), the question of constitutionality of normative acts is discussed in relation to the regulations defined by Chapter 7, of the Constitution.
f.3 On the basis of submission made by the High Council of Justice the question of compatibility of normative acts with Articles 82, 84, 86, 86, 87 and 90 of the Constitution shall be discussed.
g. exercise other powers determined by the Constitution and the Organic Law of Georgia.
2. The judgment of the Constitutional Court shall be final. A normative act or a part thereof recognised as unconstitutional shall cease to have legal effect from the moment of the promulgation of the respective judgment of the Constitutional Court.
Article 90
1. The Supreme Court of Georgia is the Court of Cassation.
2. The President and the judges of the Supreme Court of Georgia shall be elected for a period of not less than ten years by the Parliament by the majority of the number of the members of Parliament on the current nominal list upon the submission of the President of Georgia.
3. The Competence of the Supreme Court, its organization, rules of termination of tenure of judges and activities shall be defined by organic law.
4. The President and the members of the Supreme Court of Georgia shall enjoy personal immunity. Criminal proceeding of the President or a judge of the Supreme Court, their arrest or detention, the search of their apartment, car, workplace or person shall be permissible only by the consent of the Parliament, except when the President or a judge is caught flagrante delicto, which shall immediately be notified to the Parliament. Unless the Parliament gives its consent, the arrested or detained shall immediately be released.
Article 91
(Deleted by the Constitutional Law of 6 February 2004).
CHAPTER SIX: State Finances and Control.
Article 92
1. The Parliament of Georgia by the majority of the number of the members of the Parliament on the current nominal list shall annually adopt the
Law on the State Budget, which shall be signed by the President of Georgia.
2. The procedure of the drafting and adoption of the State Budget shall be determined by law.
Article 93
1. Only the Government of Georgia is authorized to submit the Draft State Budget to the Parliament after examination of the main data and directions with the Parliamentary Committees
2. The Government shall present the draft budget for the coming year no later than three months before the end of the current budget year.
Along with the draft budget the Government shall present the report on implementation of the current budget. The Government shall present the report on implementation of the state budget to the Parliament for approval no later than 5 months before the end of the current budget year.
3. The draft budget shall not be amended without the consent of the Government. The Government may claim Parliamentary approval of additional expenditure only if it can indicate the source for such expenditure.
4. If the Parliament fails to approve the proposed budget within 3 months, the last year budget shall cover the expenses.
5. The draft law that may entail increase of expenditure of the State Budget, decrease of revenues or new financial undertakings may be adopted by the Parliament only with the consent of the Government. The draft law of the coming financial year shall be approved within the frames of document on parameters and directions submitted by the Government.
6. The Parliament shall control the legality of utilization of the state financial resources through the Chamber of Control of Georgia.
Article 94
1. The payment of taxes and duties shall be obligatory in the amount and in accordance with a procedure established by law.
2. The structure of taxes and duties and the procedure for the introduction thereof shall only be determined by law.
3. Release from taxes shall be admitted only by the Law.
Article 95
1. The National Bank of Georgia conducts monetary policy to ensure stability of prices and maintains stable functioning of financial sector.
2. Deleted on 15.10.2010
3. The National Bank shall be the bank of banks and the banker of the Government of Georgia and its fiscal agent.
4. The National Bank shall be independent in its activity. The rights and duties, activity procedure and guarantee of independence of the National Bank shall be determined by the Organic Law.
5. The name of money and the monetary unit shall be determined by law. Only the National Bank shall be authorised to money emission.
Article 96
1. The Council of the National Bank shall be the higher body of the National Bank of Georgia. The members of the Council of the National Bank shall be elected for a term of seven years by the Parliament by the majority of the number of the members of the Parliament on the current nominal list upon the submission of the President of Georgia. The dismissal of the members of the Council of the National Bank shall be permissible only under a decision of the Parliament in accordance with Article 64.
2. The President of Georgia appoints and dismisses the President of National bank from among the members of the board of the National Bank
(15.10.2010. N 3710 shall enter into force as of January1 2011)
3. The National Bank is accountable to the Parliament and presents account to it annually.
Article 97
1. The Chamber of Control of Georgia shall supervise the use and expenditure of state funds and of other material values. It shall also be authorised to examine activity of other state bodies of fiscal and economic control, submit proposals on improving tax legislation to the
Parliament.
2. The Chamber of Control shall be independent in its activity. It shall be accountable to the Parliament. The President of the Chamber of Control shall be elected for a term of five years by the Parliament of Georgia by the majority of the number of the members of the Parliament on the current nominal list upon the submission of the President of Georgia. The grounds and a procedure of his/her dismissal shall be prescribed by the Constitution and law.
3. The Chamber of Control shall submit a report to the Parliament regarding Government expenditure twice a year while submitting the preliminary and final reports on the fulfilment of the Budget, and it shall submit a report on its activity once a year.
4. The authority, organisation and procedure activity and guarantee of the independence of the Chamber of Control shall be determined by law.
5. Other bodies of state control shall be set up in accordance with law.
CHAPTER SEVEN: State Defence
Article 98
1. Defensive war shall be a sovereign right of Georgia.
2. Georgia shall have the armed forces for the defence of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country, as well as for the honouring its international obligations.
3. The types and the composition of the armed forces shall be determined by law. The structure of the armed forces shall be approved by the
President of Georgia, while the strength thereof shall be approved by the Parliament by the majority of the number of the members of the Parliament on the current nominal list upon the submission of the Council of National Security.
Article 99
1. With the view of organising the military construction and defence of the country, the Council of National Security shall be set up which shall be guided by the President of Georgia.
2. The composition, authority and procedure activity of the Council of National Security shall be determined by the Organic Law.
Article 100
1. The President of Georgia shall adopt a decision on the use of the armed forces and submit it to the Parliament within 48 hours for approval. In addition the use of the armed forces for the honouring international obligations shall be impermissible without the consent of the Parliament of Georgia.
2. For the purpose of state defence in the exclusive cases and in cases envisaged by law, the decision about the entrance, use and movement of the armed forces of another state on the territory of Georgia shall be adopted by the President of Georgia. The decision shall immediately be submitted to the Parliament for approval and shall be enforced after the consent of the Parliament.
Article 101
1. Defence of Georgia shall be an obligation of every citizen of Georgia.
2. Defence of the country and discharge of military service shall be a duty of every citizen being fit thereupon. The form of the discharge of military service shall be determined by law.
CHAPTER SEVEN.1: Local Self-Government
Article 101.1
1 The rule of creation and activity of representative and executive bodies of local self-government is defined by the organic law. The executive bodies of the local self-governments are accountable to the local representative bodies.
2 The representative body of local self-government - the City Council (Sakrebulo) is elected by the Georgian citizens registered within the self-government unit area based on direct, universal, equal suffrage and clandestine voting.
3 The rule of establishing a local self-government unit and revocation of its performance, as well as administrative border's revision rule are defined by the organic law. Prior to revocation or revision of the administrative borders of the self-governmental unit, the consultations shall be held.
Article 101.2
1 Rights and authority of local self-government unit are separated from those of the state institutions. The self-government unit has its own and delegated rights and authorities. The organic law shall determine the main principles defining rights and authorities of the self-government units.
2 The self-government unit independently and on own responsibility exercises its duties in compliance with the rules determined by Georgian
Legislation. Own authority defined by the organic law is exclusive.
3 Self-government unit is authorized to take any decision on its own initiative, if this decision does not fall under the authority of any other government institution or it is not prohibited by the Law.
4 State institutions may delegate rights and powers to the self-government unit on basis of legislative acts and also agreement only by transferring relevant material and financial sources, the calculation of amount of which is determined by the Law.
Article 101.3
1. Local self-government has its property and financial resources
2. The decisions made by the self-government units within the scope of their competence shall be necessarily implemented within the self-government's unit territory.
3. The State's supervision over the activities of self-government units is carried out by the procedure prescribed by the Law. The State's supervision aims to provide compliance of the self-government's normative acts with the Georgian Legislation and at reinforcing the delegated rights and powers in proper manner. The State exercises supervision proportionally to its goals."
CHAPTER EIGHT: Revision of the Constitution
Article 102
1. The following shall be entitled to submit a draft law on general or partial revision of the Constitution:
b. more than half of the total number of the members of the Parliament;
c. not less than 200,000 electors.
2. A draft law on the revision of the Constitution shall be submitted to the Parliament, which shall promulgate the former for the public discussion.
The Parliament shall begin the discussion of the draft law after a month from its promulgation.
3. The revision draft of Constitution shall be deemed as adopted, if supported by no less than full composition of the Parliament of Georgia on two subsequent sessions of the Parliament of Georgia held within the interval of at least 3 months
4. The law on the revision of the Constitution shall be signed and promulgated by the President of Georgia in accordance with a procedure provided for by Article 68 of the Constitution.
Article 103
The announcement of a state of emergency or martial law shall lead to the suspension of the revision of the Constitution until the cancellation of the state of emergency or martial law.
CHAPTER NINE: Transitional Provisions
Article 104
1. The Constitution of Georgia shall enter into force from the day of the recognition of the authority of the newly elected President and the Parliament of Georgia.
2. Articles 49, 50 and 70 of the Constitution shall enter into force upon the promulgation of the Constitution.
Article 104.1
1. Paragraph 1 of Article 49 and paragraph 1 of Article 58 of the Constitution shall enter into force upon the making of appropriate amendments and addenda to the Organic law of Georgia “The Election Code of Georgia”.
2. The composition of the Parliament of Georgia elected on 2004 before termination its authority, as well as the necessary number of the members of the Parliament for the establishment of a faction shall be determined in accordance with the legislation acting at the moment of the election of this
Parliament.
3. Regular elections of the Parliament of Georgia elected in 2008 shall take place in May. The President of Georgia shall fix the date of elections within 60 days before election. (11.03.2008 N 5833).
Article 104.2
The authority of the member of the Parliament of Georgia elected by the majoritarian system in 21 May 2008 election whose power was preterm terminated by the statement of the Parliament according to article 54, paragraph2, subparagraph of the Constitution of Georgia shall be restored in case the authority of their substitutes has not been acknowledged and if they give their consent by 1 January 2010.
Art 104.3
1. Unscheduled elections of bodies of self-government shall be carried out no later than June 1, 2010.
2. Elections of Mayor of Tbilisi shall be held on fair, universal, equal and direct basis by secret ballot, in the terms defined by the first paragraph
of the present article.
3 .The date of the election envisaged in the paragraph 2 of the present article shall be scheduled by the President of Georgia no later than 60 days before the election.
4. Within 1 month after entering into force of the present article the Parliament of Georgia ensures the correspondence of the legislative acts with present article.
Article 105
1. A political association of citizens registered in accordance with a procedure established by law, the initiative of which is confirmed by at least
50,000 signatures or which had a representative in the Parliament by the day of the adoption of the present Constitution, shall have the right to stand for the election of 1995.
2. Election under the proportional system shall be conducted with a single party list.
3. A political association or an electoral block shall be entitled to nominate a candidate to the office of a member of the Parliament before a majority election district, the candidate being at the same time on its party list as well.
4. The candidate having obtained most number of votes but not less than one third of the participants to the ballot shall be deemed to be elected in the majority electoral district.
5. If none of the candidates obtained the required number of votes in the first round, a second round shall be held. Two candidates having the best results shall participate in the second round. The candidate having obtained the most number of votes shall be deemed to be elected.
6. The present Article shall enter into force upon the promulgation of the Constitution and shall remain in force until the recognition of the authority of the newly elected Parliament.
Article 106
1. After the enforcement of the Constitution, only the legal act or a part thereof, which is not in contradiction with the Constitution, shall have the legal force.
2. During two years after the enforcement of the Constitution, the President of Georgia and the Parliament of Georgia shall ensure the public registration of normative acts adopted before the Constitution came into force and their compatibility with the Constitution and laws.
3. During two years after the enforcement of the Constitution, the Parliament shall adopt the Organic Laws envisaged by the Constitution or confirm the lawfulness of normative acts existing in the field.
Article 107
1. Before the adoption of the Organic Laws on judiciary in accordance with the Constitution, the current legislation on the judiciary shall remain in force.
2. The second and third paragraphs of Article 18 of the Constitution shall enter into force after the adoption of the respective criminal procedures legislative acts.
3. The Organic Law on the Constitutional Court shall be adopted before 1 February 1996.
Article 108
As an exception moving changes or addenda to the second paragraph of Article 102 of the Constitution in terms of the complete restoration of jurisdiction on the whole territory of Georgia shall be possible without publication of the draft law on the revision of the Constitution for the general-public discussion.
Article 109
1. The Constitution adopted in accordance with the established procedure shall be signed and promulgated by the Head of State of Georgia.
2. The members of the Parliament of Georgia and the members of the Constitutional Commission shall sign the text of the Constitution. After the enforcement of the Constitution, at least within a year, the text of the Constitution shall publicly be displayed in the buildings of all local bodies of Georgia in order the population become familiar with its contents.