
The Basic  Law  Of Government 

The   Custodian  of the  two  Holy  Mosques, King Fahd Bin  Abdulaziz Al-Saud  issued  a  Royal 
Decree  embodying  the  Basic  Government  Law. The following  is the text  of the  Decree. 

In the name  of God, the most compassionate, the  most Merciful, 

No:  A/90 

Dated  27th  Shaban 1412  H 

With the help  of God, we,  Fahd Bin Abdulaziz  Al-Saud,  Monarch  of the Kingdom  of Saudi 
Arabia, having taken  into  consideration  the public  interest,  and  in view of  the progress  of the  State 
in  various  fields  and out  of the  desire to  achieve  the  objectives  we  are  pursuing,  have  decreed  the 
following: 

1 - The promulgation  of the Basic  Law of Government  as the  attached text, 

2  - That  all regulations,  orders  and decrees  in  force  shall remain  valid when  this Basic  Law comes 
into  force,  until they  are  amended to  conform  with it, 

3 - That this  decree  shall be  published  in the  Official  Gazette,  and  shall  come  into  force  on the date 
of its publication. 

In the name  of God, the  Most Compassionate,  the  Most Merciful, 

THE BASIC  LAW  OF GOVERNMENT 

CHAPTER ONE 

GENERAL  PRINCIPLES 

Article  1: 

The Kingdom ofSaudi Arabia is a sovereign  Arab Islamic State. Its religion is Islam. Its 
constitution is Almighty God'sBook, The Holy Quran, and the Sunna(Tradition) of the 
Prophet(PBUH). Arabic is the language of the Kingdom. The  City of Riyadh is the capital. 

Article 2: 

The State's public holidays are Eid Al Fitr (the Feast of Ramadan) and Eid Al Adhha (The Feast of 
the  Sacrifice).   Its calendar  follows the  Hijri year  (the lunar year). 
Article 3: 


The  flag of the  State is  as  follows: 

(a)   Its  color is  green. 

(b)   Its width equals two  thirds  of its  length. 

(c)  The words,  "[font not supported]"  (There is no god but God and Mohammed  is His 
Messenger)  are inscribed  in the  center, with  a drawn  sword  underneath. The  flag  should  never be 
inverted. 

The Law will  specify the rules pertaining  to the  flag. 

Article  4: 

The  State's  Emblem  represents  two  crossed  swords  with  a  palm  tree  in  the  middle  of the  upper 
space  between them.   The Law will  define  the  State's Anthem  and medals. 

CHAPTER TWO 

THE  LAW OF  GOVERNMENT 

Article  5: 

(a)  Monarchy  is  the  system of rule in the  Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia. 

(b)  Rulers  of the  country  shall  be   from  amongst  the  sons  of the  founder  King  Abdulaziz  Bin 
Abdulrahman   al  Faisal  Al-Saud,   and  their  descendants.       The  most  upright  among  them   shall 
receive  allegiance  according  to Almighty  God's  Book and His  Messenger's  Sunna(The  Tradition). 

(c)  The King  shall choose  the  Crown Prince  and relieve  him  by  a Royal  Decree. 

(d)  The  Crown  Prince  shall  devote  himself  exclusively  to  his  duties  as  Crown  Prince  and  shall 
perform  any  other duties  delegated  to him by  the King. 

(e)  Upon  the death  of the King,  the  Crown  Prince  shall  assume  the  Royal  powers  until  a pledge  of 
allegiance  (bay'a) is  given. 

Article  6: 

In  support  of the  Book  of God  and  the  Sunna  of His  Messenger(PBUH),   citizens  shall  give  the 
pledge  of allegiance  (bay'a) to the King, professing  loyalty in times  of hardship  and ease. 

Article  7: 

Government  in the  Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia  derives  its  authority  from the  Book  of God  and  the 
Sunna  of the  Prophet(PBUH),  which  are  the  ultimate  sources  of reference  for  this  Law  and  the 
other laws  of the  State. 

Article  8: 

Government  in the Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia  is based  on justice,  shura  (consultation)  and equality 
according  to Islamic  Sharia. 

CHAPTER THREE 

THE  VALUES  OF  SAUDI  SOCIETY 

Article  9: 

The  family  is  the  nucleus  of Saudi  Society. Members  of the  family  shall be  raised  in  the  Islamic 
Creed,  which  demands  allegiance  and  obedience  to  God,  to  His  Prophet  and  to the  rulers,  respect 
for  and  obedience  to the laws,  and love  for  and pride  in the  Homeland  and its glorious  history. 

Article  10: 

The  state  shall  aspire  to  promote  family  bonds  and  Arab-Islamic  values. It  shall  take  care  of all 
individuals  and provide  the  right conditions  for the  growth  of their talents and  skills. 

Article  11: 

Saudi  Society   is  based   on  full  adherence  to   God's  guidance. Members of this society shall 
cooperate amongst themselves in charity, piety  and cohesion. 

Article  12: 

Consolidation  of the  national  unity  is  a  duty. The  State shall forbid all activities that  may  lead  to 
division, disorder  and partition. 

Article  13: 

The aim of education is to  implant the Islamic  Creed  in the hearts  of all youths, to help  them  acquire 
knowledge  and  skills,  to  qualify  them  to  become  useful  members  of their  society,  to  love  their 
homeland  and take  pride  in its history. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

ECONOMIC  PRINCIPLES 

Article  14: 

All  natural  resources  that  God  has  deposited  underground,  above  ground,  in territorial  waters  or 
within  the  land  and  sea  domains  under  the  authority  of the  State,  together  with  revenues  of these 
resources,  shall be the property  of the  State, as  provided  by the  Law. 

The  Law  shall  specify  means  for  exploitation, protection  and development  of these  resources  in the 
best interest  of the  State,  and  its  security  and  economy. 

Article  15: 

No  concessions  or  licenses  to  exploit  any public  resources  of the  country  shall be  granted  unless 
authorized  by provisions  of the Law. 

Article  16: 

Public  funds  are  inviolable. They  shall  be  protected  by  the  State  and  safeguarded  by  all  citizens 
and residents. 

Article  17: 

Ownership,   capital  and  labor  are  basic   components   of the   economic   and  social   entity  of  the 
Kingdom.  They  are personal  rights which perform  a  social  function  in accordance  with the Islamic 
 Sharia. 

Article  18: 

The   State  shall  guarantee  private  ownership   and  its  sanctity.   No  one   shall  be  deprived  of his 
private  property,  unless  in  service  of the  public  interest.  In  this case, a fair compensation  shall be 
given to him. 

Article  19: 

General  confiscation  of  assets  is  prohibited.   No  confiscation  of  an  individual's  assets   shall  be 
enforced without  a judicial  ruling. 

Article 20: 

No  taxes  or  fees  shall  be  imposed,  except  in  need  and  on  a just  basis. Imposition,  amendment, 
cancellation  or exemption  shall take place  according to the  provisions  of the  Law. 
Article 21: 

Zakat  shall be  collected  and spent for legitimate  expenses. 

Article 22: 

Economic  and  social  development  shall be  carried  out according to  a fair, wise plan. 

CHAPTER  5 

RIGHTS AND DUTIES 

Article 23: 

The  State  shall  protect  the  Islamic  Creed,  apply  the  Sharia,  encourage  good  and  discourage  evil, 
and undertake  its duty regarding  the  Propagation  of Islam(Da'wa). 

Article 24: 

The  State  shall  develop  and maintain the  Two  Holy  Mosques.  It  shall provide  care  and  security  to 
pilgrims  to  help them  perform  their  Hajj  and  Umra  and visit  to  the  Prophet's  Mosque  in ease  and 
comfort. 

Article 25: 

The  State will  nourish  the  aspirations  of Arab  and Moslem  nations  in solidarity  and harmony  and 
strengthen relations  with  friendly  states. 

Article 26: 

The  State  shall protect  human rights  in accordance  with the  Sharia. 

Article 27: 

The  State  shall  guarantee  the  rights  of the  citizens  and their families  in cases  of emergency,  illness, 
disability   and   old   age.    The    State  shall  support  the   Social   Insurance   Law   and   encourage 
organizations  and  individuals to participate  in philanthropic  activities. 

Article 28: 

The   State  shall  facilitate job   opportunities  for  every  able  person,  and  enact  laws  to  protect  the 
worker  and the  employer. 


Article 29: 

The  State  shall patronize  sciences,  letters  and culture.  It  shall  encourage  scientific  research, protect 
the  Islamic  and Arab heritage,  and  contribute  towards Arab,  Islamic  and human civilization. 

Article 30: 

The  State  shall provide public  education  and  commit itself to the  eradication  of illiteracy. 

Article 31: 

The  State  shall look after public health  and provide  health  care  for every  citizen. 

Article 32: 

The  State  shall work  towards  the  preservation,  protection  and improvement  of the  environment,  as 
well  as prevent pollution. 

Article 33: 

The   State  shall  form  armed  forces  and  equip  them  to  defend  the  Islamic  Creed,  the  Two  Holy 
Mosques,  the  society  and the  homeland. 

Article 34: 

It  shall  be  the  duty  of every  citizen  to  defend  the  Islamic  Creed,  the  society  and  homeland. The 
Law  shall  specify rules  for military  service. 

Article 35: 

The Law  shall  specify rules pertaining  to  Saudi Arabian  nationality. 

Article 36: 

The State  shall provide security for all  citizens  and  residents  on  its  territories. No   one  may  be 
confined,  arrested  or imprisoned  without reference  to the  Law. 

Article 37: 

Dwellings  are  inviolate.  Access  is prohibited without their  owners' permission.  No  search may be 
made  except in cases  specified  by the  Law. 

Article 38: 

No  one  shall  be  punished  for another's  crimes.  No  conviction  or penalty  shall be  inflicted without 
reference  to  the  Sharia  or  the  provisions  of the  Law.   Punishment  shall  not  be  imposed  ex  post 
facto. 

Article 39: 

Mass  media  and  all  other vehicles  of expression  shall  employ  civil  and  polite  language,  contribute 
towards  the  education  of the  nation  and  strengthen  unity.  It  is prohibited  to commit  acts leading  to 
disorder  and  division,  affecting  the  security  of the  state  and  its  public  relations,  or  undermining 
human dignity  and rights.   Details  shall be  specified in the  Law. 

Article  40: 

The privacy  of telegraphic and postal communications, and telephone and other means of 
communication shall be inviolate. There shall be no onfiscation, delay, surveillance  or 
eavesdropping, except in cases provided by the  Law. 

Article  41: 

Residents  in the Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia  shall  abide  by  its  laws,  observe  the  values  of the  Saudi 
community  and respect  Saudi traditions  and  feelings. 

Article  42: 

The  State  shall grant the right  of political  asylum provided  it  is  in the  public  interest. International 
agreements  and  laws  shall define rules  and procedures  for the  extradition  of common criminals. 

Article  43: 

Councils  held by  the  King  and the  Crown  Prince  shall be  open for all citizens  and anyone  else who 
may  have  a  complaint  or  a  grievance.  A citizen  shall be  entitled  to  address  public  authorities  and 
discuss  any  matters  of concern to him. 

CHAPTER  6 

THE AUTHORITIES  OF  THE STATE 

Article  44: 

The Authorities  of the  State consist  of: 

 - The  Judicial  Authority 

 - The Executive  Authority 

 - The  Regulatory  Authority 

 These  authorities  will  cooperate  in  the  performance  of their  functions,  according  to  this  Law  or 
 other laws.   The King  is the ultimate  arbiter  for these Authorities. 

 Article  45: 

 The  Holy  Quran and the  Sunna(Tradition) of God's Messenger shall be the  source for 
 fetwas(religious  advisory   rulings). The  Law   shall  specify  hierarchical   organization  for the 
 composition  of the  Council  of the  Senior Ulema, the Research Administration  and the  Office  of the 
 Mufti,  together with their  functions. 

 Article  46: 

 The  Judiciary  is  an  independent  authority. The  decisions  of judges  shall  not  be  subject  to  any 
 authority  other than the  authority  of the Islamic  Sharia. 

 Article  47: 

 All  people,  either  citizens  or  residents in  the  Kingdom, are entitled to file suit on an equal basis. 
 The  Law shall  specify procedures  for  this purpose. 

 Article  48: 

 The  Courts  shall  apply rules  of the Islamic  Sharia in  cases  that are  brought before  them,  according 
 to  the  Holy   Quran  and  the   Sunna,  and  according  to  laws  which  are   decreed  by  the  ruler  in 
 agreement with Holy  Quran  and the  Sunna. 

 Article  49: 

 Courts  are  empowered  to  arbitrate  in  all disputes  and  crimes,  taking  into  account  the provisions  of 
 Article  53  of this  Law. 

 Article  50: 

 The  King   or  whomsoever  he  may  deputize  shall  concern  himself  with  the   implementation  of 
judicial  rulings. 

 Article  51: 

 The  Law  shall  specify the  composition  of the  Supreme  Judiciary  Council  and its  functions,  as well 
 as the hierarchy   for the  courts and their  functions. 


Article  52: 

Judges  shall  be  appointed  and  relieved  by  Royal  Decree,   based  on  a  proposal  of the  Supreme 
Judiciary  Council,  in accordance  with provisions  of the  Law.                                                                     

Article  53: 

The  Law  shall  specify the  hierarchy  of the  Board of Grievances  and  its  functions. 

Article  54: 

The  Law  shall  specify  the  relationship  between  the  Commission   of  Inquiry   and  the  Attorney 
General  and their  organization  and functions. 

Article  55: 

The  King  shall rule  the nation  according  to  the  Sharia.  He  shall  also  supervise the  implementation 
of the  Sharia, the general policy  of the  State and the defense  and protection of the country. 

Article  56: 

The  King  is  the  Prime  Minister.  Members  of the  Council  of Ministers  shall  assist  him  in  the 
performance  of his mission  according  to the  provisions  of this  law and  other laws.  The  Council  of 
Ministers  Law  shall  specify  the  powers  of the  Council  in respect  of internal  and  external  affairs, 
organization   of  governmental   departments   and  their  coordination. In  addition,  the  Law   shall 
specify  the  qualifications  and the powers  of the ministers,  ministerial  accountability  procedures  and 
all  matters pertaining  to  the  ministers.   The  Law  of the  Council  of Ministers  and  the  areas  of their 
authority  may be  amended  according  to this Law. 

Article  57: 

(a)  The  King  shall  appoint  and relieve  deputies  of the  Prime  Minister  and member ministers  of the 
Council  by  Royal  Decree. 

(b)   Deputies   of  the   Prime   Minister   and   member  ministers   of  the Council   shall  be  jointly 
responsible  to  the  King  for  the  implementation  of  the  Sharia,  laws  and  the  general  policy  of the 
State. 

(c)  The King  is  entitled to  dissolve  and reconstitute  the  Council  of Ministers. 

Article  58: 

The  King  shall  appoint those who  are  at the rank  of ministers  and  deputy  ministers,  and those who 
are  at the highest  grade  and relieve  them by  a Royal  Decree  as provided  by  the Law.  Ministers  and 
heads  of independent  departments  shall  be  answerable  to the  King  in respect  of the ministries  and 
agencies  they head. 

Article  59: 

The  Law  shall  specify  the  rules  of the  Civil  Service,  including  salaries,  awards,  compensations, 
privileges  and pensions. 

Article  60: 

The  King  is the  Supreme  Commander  of the Armed  Forces.   He  shall  appoint  and dismiss  officers 
from service,  as provided  by  terms  of the  Law. 

Article  61: 

The  King  shall  announce  any  state  of emergency  or  general  mobilization  and  shall  declare  war. 
The  Law shall  specify rules  for this purpose. 

Article  62: 

If an imminent danger  is  threatening  the  safety  of the Kingdom, the  integrity  of its territories  or the 
security and interests  of its  people, or is impeding  the  functions  of official  organizations, the King 
may  take  urgent  measures  to  deal  with  such  a  danger.   When  he  considers  that  these  measures 
should  continue,  necessary  arrangements  shall be  made  in accordance  with the Law. 

Article  63: 

The  King  shall  receive  kings and heads of states,  appoint  his  representatives  to  other  states, and 
receive  credentials  of other  states' representatives  accredited  to him. 

Article  64: 

The  King shall award  medals  according to provisions  of the  law. 

Article  65: 

The  King may  delegate  some powers  of authority  to the  Crown Prince  by Royal Decree. 

Article  66: 

Should  the  King  happen  to  travel  abroad,  he   shall  issue  a  Royal  Decree  to  deputize  the  Crown 
Prince  to  manage  the  affairs  of State  and  look after the interests of the people, as  set  out  in  the 
Royal  Decree. 

                                    
Article  67: 

The  Regulatory  Authority  shall be  concerned  with the  making  of laws  and regulations  which  will 
safeguard all interests, and remove  evil  from the  state's  affairs,  according  to  Sharia. Its powers shall 
be  exercised  according  to provisions  of this Law  and the  Law  of the  Council  of Ministers  and the 
Law of the  Shura Council. 

Article  68: 

The  Shura  Council  shall  be  established.  Its  Law  shall  specify  the  details  of its  formation,  powers 
and selection  of members.  The King may  dissolve and reconstitute  the  Shura Council. 

Article  69: 

The  King  may  summon  the  Shura  Council  and  the  Council  of Ministers  for  a joint  session.   He 
may  summon others  whom  he  deems  necessary  to  attend the meeting  and  discuss  whatever  affairs 
he  considers  fit. 

Article  70: 

Laws,  international  agreements,  treaties  and  concessions  shall  be  approved  and amended  by  Royal 
Decrees. 

Article  71: 

Laws   shall  be  published  in  the  Official   Gazette,   and  implemented   effective  from  the  date   of 
publication,  unless  another  date  is  specified. 

CHAPTER  SEVEN 

FINANCIAL  AFFAIRS 

Article  72: 

(a)  The  Law  shall  include provisions  for the  State's revenues  and their  depositing  with  the  General 
Treasury  of the  State. 

(b)   Revenues  shall be  recorded  and spent  according  to  procedures  stipulated by  provisions  of the 
Law. 

Article  73: 

No   commitment  to  pay   a  sum  of  money  from  the   General   Treasury   shall  be  made   without 
adherence  to  budget rules.   If provisions  of the  budget  cannot  cover the  demand, then  a  provision 
shall be  made through  a Royal  Decree. 

Article  74: 

Assets  of the  State may not  be  sold,  rented or disposed  of unless  so authorized  by  the Law. 

Article  75: 

Laws  shall  specify  provisions  for currency,  banks,  standards,  measures  and weights. 

Article  76: 

The  Law  shall  set the  fiscal year for the  State.  The budget  shall be  announced  according  to  a Royal 
Decree.     It  shall  specify  assessed  amounts  of revenue  and  expenditure  one  month  ahead  of the 
coming  fiscal year.  If the budget  cannot be  issued  due  to  compelling  reasons  before  the  beginning 
of the  new  fiscal  year,  the  budget  of the  previous  year  shall remain  in  force  until  the  new  budget 
can be  issued. 

Article  77: 

The   competent  department  shall  prepare  the  closing  account  of the   State  for  the  past  year  and 
forward  it to the Prime  Minister. 

Article  78: 

Budgets  and  closing  accounts  of departments  which  have  corporate  rights,  shall be  subject to  the 
same procedures  which  are  applicable  to the  State's budget  and closing  accounts. 

CHAPTER  8 

INSTITUTIONS  OF  AUDIT 

Article  79: 

All   revenues   and  expenditures  of  the State, as   well   as  movable   and  fixed   assets, shall  be 
subsequently  audited  to  ensure  proper  use  and  management.  An  annual report  to  this  effect  shall 
be   forwarded  to  the  Prime  Minister. The  Law  shall  specify  details of the competent auditing 
institution, together  with its  affiliations  and  areas  of authority. 

Article  80: 

Governmental  institutions  shall  also  be  audited  to  ensure  proper  administrative  performance  and 
implementation  of laws.   Financial  and  administrative  violations  shall  be  investigated.   An  annual 
report  shall  be  forwarded  to  the  Prime  Minister.   The  Law  shall  specify  details  of the  competent 
institution  in charge, together  with its affiliations  and areas  of authority. 

CHAPTER 9 

GENERAL  PRINCIPLES 

Article  81: 

With regard  to treaties  and agreements, the  application  of this  Law shall not violate  commitments  of 
the  Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia towards  other  states, international  organizations  and bodies. 

Article  82: 

No  provision  of this  Law whatsoever  may  be  suspended  except  on  a temporary  basis,  such  as  in 
wartime or  during  the  declaration   of  a   state  of  emergency. Such a  suspension  shall be in 
accordance  with the terms  of the  Law and may not violate  Article  7. 

Article  83: 

No  amendment to this Law  shall be made,  except in the  same manner  as it  was promulgated. 

