

                           Constitution of the Azerbaijan Republic 

                                                  First Section 
                                                       General 

 CHAPTER  I.               People's power 

Article  1.                 The source  ofpower 

I.       The  sole  source  of state power  in the  Azerbaijan Republic  are the people  of Azerbaijan. 

II.      People  of Azerbaijan  are  citizens  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  living  on  the  territory  of the 
         Azerbaijan  Republic  and  outside  it who  are  subordinate  to  the Azerbaijan  state  and  its  laws 
         which  does not  exclude  standards  of international  legislation. 

Article  2.                Sovereignty  ofpeople 

I.        Sovereign   right     of  the   Azerbaijanian      people    is  the   right   of  free and  independent 
         determination  of their  destiny  and establishment  of their own  form of governance. 

II.      The  people  of Azerbaijan  exercise  their  sovereign  right  directly-by  way   of nation-wide 
         voting-referendum,  and through  their representatives  elected based  on universal,  equal  and 
         direct  suffrage by  way  of free,  secret  and personal  ballot. 

Article  3.                Questions solved  by  way  of nation-wide  voting-referendum 

I.       People  of Azerbaijan  may  solve  any  questions  involving  their  rights  and interests  by  way  of 
         referendum. 

II.      The  following  questions  may be  solved only by  way  of referendum: 
          1.      acceptance   of  the   Constitution   of  the   Azerbaijan   Republic and introduction of 
                  amendments  thereto; 
         2.       change  of state  borders  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.    The  referendum  can  not be held with respect  to  the  following issues: 
          1.      Taxation  and state  budget 
         2.       Amnesty  and pardon 
                  a.   "Election,  appointment  or  approval  of the  officials,  whose  election,  appointment 
                       or  approval  has  been  accordingly  referred  to  the  competences  of the  legislative 
                       and (or)  executive  bodies". 

Article  4.                Right  to represent the people 

No  one  except  authorized  representatives  elected  by  the  people  will  have  the  right  to  represent  the 
people,  speak  on behalf of people  and to  make  statements  on behalf of people. 

Article  5.                  Unity  ofpeople 

 I.       The  people  of Azerbaijan  are united. 

 II.      Unity  of the Azerbaijanian  people  constitutes  the  basis  of the Azerbaijanian  state. Azerbaijan 
          Republic  is mutual  and indivisible  motherland  for all  citizens  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  6.                 Inadmissibility  of usurpation ofpower 

 I.       No  part  of people  of Azerbaijan,  no  social  group  or  organization,  no  individual  may  usurp 
          the  right  for execution  of power. 

 II.      Usurpation  of power  is the  most  grave crime  against the  people. 

Article   7.                Azerbaijanian  state 

 I.       Azerbaijanian  state  is  democratic,  legal,  secular, unitary  republic. 

 II.      In terms  of internal  problems  state power  in the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  limited only  by  law, 
          in  terms  of foreign  policy-by  provisions  resulting  from  international  agreements,  wherein 
          the Azerbaijan  Republic  is one  of the parties. 

 III.     State power  in the Azerbaijan  Republic  is based  on a principle  of division of powers: 
                   Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  exercises  legislative  power; 
                    executive power  belongs to the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic; 
                   law courts  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  exercise judicial  power. 

 IV.      According  to  provisions  of the present  Constitution legislative,  executive  and judicial  power 
          interact  and  are independent  within the  limits of their  authority. 

Article  8.                  The Head of the Azerbaijanian  state 

 I.       The   President   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   is  the   Head  of  the  Azerbaijanian state. He 
          represents  Azerbaijanian         state  both  within  the country and in its  relations  with  foreign 
          countries. 

 II.      The   President  of  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  represents   unity   of Azerbaijanian  people   and 
          provides  continuity  of the Azerbaijanian  statehood. 

 III.     The   President   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   is   guarantor  of independence and  territorial 
          integrity   of the  Azerbaijanian   state,   observance  of  international   agreements  wherein  the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  is one  of the parties. 

 IV.      The  President  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  is  guarantor  of independence  of judicial  power. 

Article  9.                 Military forces 

 I.       In  order  to  provide  its  safety  and  defend  itself the  Azerbaijan  Republic establishes  Military 
          forces  and other military  troops 
 II.      The  Azerbaijan  Republic  rejects  a  war  as  a means  of infringement  on  independence  of other 
          states  and way  of settlement of international  conflicts. 

 III.     The  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  the  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief  of Military 
          Forces  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  10.                Principles  of international relations 

Azerbaijan  Republic  develops  its  relations  with  other  countries  based  on principles  recognized  in 
 international  legal  standards. 

Article  11.                 Territory 

 I.       The  territory  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  is  sole, inviolable  and indivisible. 

 II.      Internal  waters  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  sector of the  Caspian  Sea (lake)  belonging  to  the 
          Azerbaijan   Republic,   air   space   over  the   Azerbaijan   Republic  are  integral   parts   of the 
          territory  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     No  part  of territory  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  estranged.  The  Azerbaijan  Republic 
          will  not  give  any  part  of its  territory  to  anybody;  state  borders  of the Azerbaijan Republic 
          might  be  changed  only  by  free  decision  of its  peoples  made  by  way  of referendum  declared 
          by Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan Republic. 

Article  12.                  The Highest  Objective  of the State 

 I.      Ensuring  the  rights  and  liberties  of a person  and  a  citizen, appropriate (adequate) standard  of 
 living  for the  citizens  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  is the highest  objective  of the  State. 

 II.     Rights  and  liberties  of a person  and citizen  listed in the  present Constitution are implemented in 
 accordance  with international treaties  wherein the Republic  of Azerbaijan  is one  of the parties. 

Article  13.                Property 

 I.       The  property  in the Azerbaijan  Republic  is  inviolable  and is protected  by  state. 

 II.      The  property may  be  state, private  and municipal. 

 III.     The  property  may  not  be  used  for  restriction  of rights  and liberties of a person  and  citizen, 
          interests  of society and  state,  dignity of a person. 

Article  14.                Natural resources 

 Without prejudice  to  rights  and interests  of any physical  persons  and legal  entities  natural resources 
belong to  the Azerbaijan Republic. 

Article  15.                Economic  development  and state 

 I.     Development  of an  economy based  on various  forms  of property  in the Republic  of Azerbaijan  is 
 aimed  at the prosperity  of people. 

 II.      Based  on market relationships  the Azerbaijani  state  creates  conditions  for the  development  of a 
 socially    oriented     economy, guarantees free business activity, prevents  monopoly  and  unfair 
 competition in economic  relations. 

Article  16.                 Social development  and state 

 I.       Azerbaijanian        state  takes   care   about  improvement   of prosperity of all people and  each 
          citizen,  their  social protection  and proper  living  conditions. 

 II.      Azerbaijanian  state participates  in  development  of culture,  education,  public  health,  science, 
          arts, protects  environment, historical,  material  and  spiritual heritage  of people. 

Article  17.                  Family,  Children, and the State 

 I.      Family,  as  a basic element  of society,  is under the  special protection  of the  State. 

 II.      Parents   must  take      care   of  their   children and  their education. The state implements this 
responsibility. 

 III.    Children who  do  not  have  parents  or guardians  and  are deprived of parental care are under  the 
protection  of the  State. 

 IV.      It is prohibited to involve children in activities that may cause threat to their lives, health,  and 
 morality. 

 V.      Children under the  age  of 15 may not be  employed  for work. 

 VI.    The  State  supervises  the implementation  of rights of a child. 

Article  18.                 Religion  and state 

 I.     Religion  in the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  is  separated  from the  State. All  religions  are  equal before 
 the law. 

 II.    Spreading  of and  propagandizing  religion   (religious movements),  humiliating  people's  dignity 
 and  contradicting  the principles  of humanism  are prohibited. 

 III.              The  State  education  system is  of a  secular nature. 

Article  19.                 Monetary  unit 

 I.      The monetary  unit of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  is the manat. 

 II.     Only  the  Central  Bank  has  the  right  to  introduce  money  into  and  to  withdraw  money  from 
 circulation.  The  Central  Bank  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  belongs  exclusively  to the  State. 

 III.    Utilizing  other  monetary  units besides manat as a means of payment within  the  territory  of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan  is prohibited. 


Article  20.                Restrictions  concerning state  debts 

 Debts made  with  intention  of assisting  in revolts  against the  Azerbaijanian  state  or coup  shall  not be 
 accepted  by  the Azerbaijan  Republic  as  liabilities  and paid. 

Article  21.                 Official language 

 I.       Azerbaijanian  language  is  official language  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. Azerbaijan  Republic 
          provides  development  of the Azerbaijanian  language. 

 II.      Azerbaijan  Republic  ensures  free  use  and  development  of other  languages  spoken  by  the 
          people. 

Article  22.                 Capital 

 Baku is  the  capital  of the Azerbaijan Republic. 

Article  23.                Symbols   of the Azerbaijanian  state 

 I.       State  flag  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  State  Emblem  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  State 
          hymn of the Azerbaijan  Republic  are  state  symbols  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

          State  flag  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   consists  of three  horizontal   stripes  of  same  width. 
          Upper  stripe  is  blue,  middle  stripe  is  red,  and  the  lower  one  is green; in the middle of red 
          stripe  on  both  sides  of the flag white crescent with eight-pointed star are depicted.  Width  of 
          the  flag  constitutes  half of its length 

 III.     Appearance  of  state  flag  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  State  Emblem  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic,   music   and   text   of  State  hymn   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   are   specified   by 
          Constitutional  Law  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 


                                                    Second  section 
                            Basic  rights, liberties  and responsibilities 

 CHAPTER  III.              Basic  rights and liberties  of a person  and citizen 

Article  24.                Main  
                                     principle  of rights and liberties  of a person  and citizen 

 I.       Everyone,  from  the  moment  when  they  are  born  possess  inviolable  and  inalienable  rights 
          and  liberties. 

 II.      Rights  and  liberties  envisage  also  responsibility  and  obligations  of  everyone  to  the  society 
          and  other persons. 

Article  25.                Right  of Equality 

 I.     All  people  are  equal with  respect to the law and  court. 

 II.     Men  and women have  equal rights and  liberties. 

 III.    The  State guarantees equality of rights and liberties of everyone, irrespective of race, nationality, 
religion,  language,  gender,  origin,  property status, occupation, beliefs, affiliation with political parties, 
trade  unions  or  other public  associations.  It  is  prohibited  to limit human and civil rights and liberties 
 due to race,  nationality,  religion,  language,  gender, origin, belief, political  or social  affiliation. 

 IV.      No one  may be harmed,  granted  advantages  or privileges,  or deprived  from granting  advantages 
 and privileges  on the  basis  of the  grounds laid down  in Part  III of this Article. 

V.        Everyone   shall  be   guaranteed   equal  rights  in  any  proceeding before state authorities and 
bearers  of public  authority that  decide  on his or her rights  and duties. 

Article  26.                Protection  of rights and liberties  of a person  and citizen 

 I.       Everyone  has  the  right  to  protect  his/her  rights  and  liberties  using  means  and  methods  not 
          prohibited  by  law. 

 II.      The  state  guarantees  protection  of rights  and  liberties  of all people. 

Article  27.                Right for  life 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for life. 

 II.      Except  extermination  of enemy  soldiers  in a  case  of military  aggression, when  executing  the 
          sentence  and in other  cases  envisaged  by  law, right  of every  person  for life  is inviolable. 

 III.     Death  penalty,  until  it  is  completely   annulled,  may  be   applied  legally only  in cases   of 
          especially  grave  crime  against the  state,  life  and health  of a human being. 


 IV.      Arms  shall  not  be  used  against  human  beings  except  cases  of necessary  defence,  urgent 
          situations,  whenever  a  criminal  should be  caught,  to  prevent  a  prisoner  from  running  away, 
          to prevent revolt  against the  state  or coup. 

Article  28.                 Right for freedom 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for freedom. 

 II.      Right  for  freedom  might be  restricted  only as  specified by  law, by  way  of detention, arrest or 
          imprisonment. 

 III.     Everyone   legally   being  on  the  territory   of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may   travel  without 
          restrictions,  choose the place  of residence  and travel  abroad. 

 IV.      Any  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  has  the  right  to  return  to  his/her  country  whenever 
          he/she  so  desires. 

Article  29. Right  of Ownership 

 I.      Everyone  has the right to own property. 

 II.      No  type  of property  shall  be  granted  superiority. Ownership  rights,  including  the  rights  for 
private  owners,  is protected  by  law. 

 III.    Everyone  might  have movable  and  immovable  assets  in property.  Right  of ownership  envisages 
 the rights  of owner to  own property  on his  or her  own  or together  with  others,  to use  the  property  and 
 to make  arrangements  for it. 

 IV.       No  one   can  be  deprived   of his  or  her  property   without  a decision of the court. Absolute 
 confiscation  of property  is  not allowed.  Alienation  of the  property  for  state needs is allowed only after 
 the  cost  of property  is  fairly reimbursed. 

 V.      The  State ensures  the right  of inheritance. 

Article  30.                 Right for  intellectual property 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for intellectual  property. 

 II.      Copyright, patent rights  and other rights  for intellectual  property  are protected  by  law. 

Article  31.                 Right  to live  in safety 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right to  live  in  safety. 

 II.      Except  cases  envisaged  by  law  it  is  prohibited  to  infringe  on  anybody's  life,  physical  and 
          spiritual health,  property,  living premises,  to  commit  acts of violence. 

Article 32.                   Right of Personal  Immunity 

 I.     Everyone  has the right  of personal  immunity. 

 II.     Everyone  has  the  right  to  keep  secret  private or family life. It is prohibited to interfere  with 
private  or  family  life,  except  in  cases established by law. Everyone  has  the  right  of protection  from 
unlawful interference  in his  or her private  and  family life. 

 III.    It  is  not  allowed  to  obtain,  keep, use  and  disseminate  information about a person's private life 
without  his  or her  consent. No  one  shall  be  followed,  filmed,  photographed, recorded, or  subjected  to 
 any  other  similar  actions  without  his  or her knowledge  or  despite  his  or her  disapproval,  except when 
 such actions  are prescribed by  law. 

 IV.    The    State  ensures   everyone's  right  to  keep   secret  correspondence,   telephone   conversations, 
 information  delivered  by mail,  telegraph  or  other  communication means. 

V.       Everyone  may  become  familiar  with  the  materials  collected  in  regards  to  him  or  her  save  in 
 cases  prescribed  by  law.  Everyone  has  a right to  demand  correction  or  elimination  of the  information 
 collected  in regards  to him  or her, which  does not  correspond to  the truth or is  incomplete  or collected 
through violation  of the provisions  of law. 

Article  33.                 Right for sanctity  of home 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for sanctity  of his/her home. 

 II.      Except  cases  specified  by  law or  decision  of law  court  nobody  has the  right  to  enter private 
          home  against the will  of its  inhabitants. 

                                     for  marriage 
Article  34.                 Right  

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  to marry  on reaching  the  age  specified by  legislation. 

 II.      Marriages  shall be  concluded  voluntarily.  Nobody  should be  forced  into marriage. 

 III.     Family  and marriage  are  protected  by  state.  Maternity, paternity  and  childhood  are  protected 
          by the  law. The  state  provides  support to  large  families. 

 IV.      Rights  of wife  and  husband  are  equal.  Care  and  education  of children  constitute  both  right 
          and responsibility  of parents. 

V.        Responsibility  of  children  is  to  respect  parents,  look  after  them.  Children  who  are  of age 
          (18)   and  capable  of working  must  support  disabled parents. 

Article  35.                 Right  to  work 

 I.       Labor  is  the basis  of personal  and public prosperity. 

 II.      Everyone  has  the  right  to  choose  independently,  based  on his/her  abilities,  kind  of activity, 
          profession,  occupation  and place  of work. 

 III.     Nobody  might be  forced  to work. 

 IV.      Labor   agreements   are   concluded  voluntarily.  Nobody   may  be   forced  to   conclude  labor 
          agreement. 

 V.       Based   on  decisions   of  the  law   court  there   might  be   cases  of  forced  labor,  terms   and 
          conditions  being        specified  by   legislation;   forced   labor   is  permissible   due to orders   of 
          authorized  persons  during  the term  of army service,  state  of emergency  or martial  law. 

 VI.      Everyone   has  the  right  to  work  in  safe  and  healthy  conditions,  to  get  remuneration   for 
          his/her  work  without  any  discrimination,  not  less  than  minimum  wages  rate  established  by 
          the  state. 

 VII.     Unemployed  persons  have the  right  to receive  social  allowances  from the  state. 

 VIII.    The  state  will  do  its best to  liquidate  unemployment. 

Article  36.                 Right for strikes 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right to  be  on  strike, both individually  and together  with others. 

 II.      Right  for  strike  for  those  working  based  on  labor  agreements  might  be  restricted  only  in 
 cases   envisaged   by   the   law.  Soldiers   and  civilians   employed   in  the  Army   and   other  military 
 formations  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  have no right  to  go on  strike. 

 III.     Individual  and collective  labor disputes  are  settled  in line  with legislation. 

Article  37.                 Right for  rest 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for rest. 

 II.      For those  working  based  on  labor  agreements  8-hour working  day, national  holidays  and  at 
          least  one paid  vacation  with duration  of at  least 21  calendar  days  are guaranteed. 

Article  38.                 Right for social protection 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for  social protection. 

 II.      Most  vulnerable  persons  must  get  support, in the  first place,  from members  of their families. 

 III.     Everyone  has the  right  for social  protection  on reaching  specific  age according  to  legislation, 
          in  case  of illness,  disability,  loss  of bread-winner  in the  family,  due to  unemployment  and  in 
          other  cases  envisaged  by  legislation. 

 IV.      Minimum  sum of pensions  and  social  allowances  is  specified  by  law. 

 V.       The    state   creates   possibilities      for   development of charitable activity, voluntary social 
          insurance  and  other forms  of social protection. 

Article   39. Right  of Living  in Healthy Environment 

 I.      Everyone  has the right to live in a healthy  environment. 

 II.      Everyone  has  the  right to  obtain  information  about the  real  condition  of the  environment  and to 
receive  compensation  for the health  or property  damage  caused by  the violation of ecological  law. 


 III.    No  one may  cause  threat  or  damage  to the  environment  and  natural  resources  beyond the  limits 
 set by  law. 

 IV.      The  state  guarantees  the preservation of ecological balance and protection of the species of wild 
plants  and animals  determined  by law. 

Article  40.                 Right for  culture 

 I.       Everyone  has  the  right to  take part  in cultural life,  to  use organizations and values of culture. 

 II.      Everyone  must  respect  historical,  cultural  and  spiritual  inheritance,  take  care of  it, protect 
          historical  and cultural  memorials. 

Article  41.                 Right for protection  of health 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for protection  of his/her health and  for medical  care. 

 II.      The  state  takes  all necessary  measures  for development  of all  forms  of health  services based 
          on    various      forms      of   property, guarantees sanitary-epidemiological safety,    creates 
          possibilities  for various  forms  of medical  insurance. 

 III.     Officials  concealing  facts  and  cases  dangerous  for  life  and  health of people will bear legal 
          responsibility. 

Article  42.                 Right for  education 

 I.       Every  citizen has the  right  for  education. 

 II.      The  state  guarantees  free  obligatory  secondary  education. 

 III.     The  system of education  is under the  state  control. 

 IV.      The  state  guarantees  continuation  of education  for  most  gifted  persons  irrespective  of their 
          financial  position. 

 V.       The  state  establishes  minimum  educational  standards. 

Article  43.                 Right for  home 

 I.       Nobody  might be  deprived  of his/her home. 

 II.      The  state  assists  in  construction  of living premises, takes special measures for realization  of 
          right  for home. 

Article  44.                 Right for  nationality 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right to  keep his/her  nationality. 

 II.      Nobody  may be  forced to  change  his/her nationality. 


Article  45.                Right  to  use mother tongue 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  to  use  his/her  mother  tongue.  Everyone  has the  right  to  be  educated, 
          carry  out creative  activity  in any  language,  as  desired. 

 II.      Nobody  may be  deprived  of right to  use  his/her mother tongue. 

Article  46.                Right  to  defend the honor and dignity 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right to  defend  his/her honor  and  dignity. 

 II.      Dignity  of  a  person  is  protected  by  state.  Nothing  must  lead  to  humiliation  of  dignity  of 
          human  being. 

 III.     Nobody  must  be   subject  to  tortures  and  torment,  treatment  or  punishment  humiliating  the 
          dignity  of human  beings.  Medical,  scientific  and  other  experiments  must  not  be  carried  out 
          on any person without  his/her  consent. 

Article  47.                 Freedom  of thought and speech 

 I.       Everyone  may  enjoy  freedom  of thought  and  speech. 

 II.      Nobody  should  be  forced  to  promulgate  his/her  thoughts  and  convictions   or  to  renounce 
          his/her thoughts  and convictions. 

 III.     Propaganda provoking racial, national, religious and social discord and animosity is 
          prohibited.

Article  48. Freedom  of Conscience 

 I.      Everyone  has the right of conscience. 

 II.     Everyone  has the  right to  determine  his  or her attitude towards  a religion  independently,  to have 
 faith in any  religion by  himself or herself or together with others, or not to have faith in any  religion, to 
 express  or disseminate  views regarding the  attitude towards  religion. 

 III.    Performance  of religious  ceremonies  shall  be  permitted  if they do  not violate the public order or 
 are not against public  morals. 

 IV.     Religious  belief and  faith do not excuse violation  of the law. 

V.       No   one  shall  be   forced  to  express  (to  demonstrate) his or her religious faith and belief, to 
 execute religious  rituals  or participate  in religious ceremonies. 

Article  49.                 Freedom  of meetings 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for meetings. 

 II.      Everyone      has   the    right,   having   notified   respective governmental bodies in advance, 
          peacefully  and  without  arms,  meet  with  other  people,   organize  meetings,  demonstrations, 
          processions,  place pickets. 

Article  50.                 Freedom  of Information 

 I.       Everyone  has the  freedom to  search, obtain, pass, prepare,  and disseminate  information  as he  or 
 she wants. 

 II.     Freedom  of mass  information  is  ensured.  State  censorship  in  mass  media  as  well  as  in  print 
media  is prohibited. 

 III.     Everyone's  right to refute  or reply  to the information  published in the media and violating his  or 
her rights  or damaging his  or her interests  shall be  guaranteed. 

Article  51.                 Freedom  of creative  activity 

 I.       Everyone  is  free  to carry  out creative  activity. 

 II.      The   state   guarantees   freedom  in  literary-artistic, scientific-technical and other kinds  of 
          creative  activity. 

Article  52.                 Right for  citizenship 

A  person  having  political  and  legal  relations  with  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  also  mutual  rights 
 and  obligations   is  the  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic.  A  person  born  on  the  territory   of the 
Azerbaijan  Republic   or  by   citizens  of the  Azerbaijan   Republic  is  the  citizen  of  the  Azerbaijan 
 Republic.  A person  is the  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  if one  of his/her parents  is  the  citizen  of 
the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  53.                 Guarantee of right  
                                                         for  citizenship 

 I.       In  no  circumstances  a  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  deprived  of citizenship  of 
          the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 II.      In  no   circumstances        a   citizen   of  the  Azerbaijan Republic may  be expelled   from   the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  or extradited to foreign  state. 

 II.      The  Azerbaijan  Republic  ensures  legal  protection  and  patronizes  citizens  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  temporarily  or permanently  living  outside the  Republic. 

Article  54.                 Right to  take part in political  life of society  and state 

 I.       Citizens  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  have  the  right to take part in political life of society and 
          state  without  restrictions. 

 II.      Any  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  has  the  right  himself  to  stand  up to  the attempt of 
          rebellion  against the  state  or state  coup. 


Article  55.                 Right  to  take part in governing  the state 

 I.       Citizens  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  have  the  right  to  take  part  in governing the  state. They 
          may  exercise  said right  themselves  or through  their representatives. 

 II.      Citizens  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  have the  right  to  work  in governmental  bodies.  Officials 
          of state bodies  are  appointed  from  citizens  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic.  Foreign  citizens  and 
          stateless  citizens  may be  employed  into  state  organizations  in  an established  order. 

Article  56.                 Electoral  right 

 I.       Citizens  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  have  the  right  to  elect  and be elected to state  bodies and 
          also to take  part  in referendum. 

 II.      Those  recognized   incapable  by   law  court  have  no  right  to  take  part  in  elections  and  in 
          referendum. 

 III.     Participation  in  elections  of military  personnel, judges,  state  employees,  religious  officials, 
          persons     imprisoned   by       decision     of  law   court,  other persons specified in the present 
          Constitution  and laws  might be restricted  by  law. 

Article  57.                 Right to  appeal 

 I.       Citizens  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  have  the  right  to  appeal  personally  and  also  to  submit 
          individual  and  collective  written  applications  to  state  bodies.  Each  application  should  be 
          responded  to  in an  established  order and term. 

 II.      Citizens   of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   have  the  right  to  criticize   activity  or work of  state 
          bodies,  their  officials,  political  parties,   trade  unions, other  public  organizations and  also 
          activity  or  work  of individuals.  Prosecution  for  criticism  is  prohibited.  Insult or libel shall 
          not be  regarded  as  criticism. 

Article  58.                 Right for joining 

 I.       Everyone  is  free  to join  other people. 

 II.      Everyone  has the  right  to establish  any union, including  political  party,  trade union  and other 
          public   organization  or  enter  existing  organizations.  Unrestricted   activity   of  all  unions  is 
          ensured. 

 III.     Nobody  may be  forced to joint  any union  or remain  its member. 

 IV.      Activity  of unions  intended  for forcible  overthrow  of legal  state power  on the  whole  territory 
          of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   or  on  a  part  thereof  is  prohibited.  Activity   of unions  which 
          violates the  Constitution  and laws  might be  stopped by  decision  of law  court. 

Article 59.                  Right for  business activity 

 Everyone  may,  using  his/her  possibilities,  abilities  and  property,  according  to  existing  legislation, 
 individually  or together  with  other  citizens,  carry  out  business  activity  or  other  kinds  of economic 
 activity not prohibited  by the  law. 

Article  60.                  Guarantee of rights and liberties  by  law  court 

 I.       Legal protection  of rights  and liberties  of every citizen  is  ensured. 

 II.      Everyone  may  appeal  to  law  court  regarding  decisions  and  activity  (or  inactivity)  of state 
          bodies, political  parties,  trade unions,  other public  organizations  and officials. 

Article  61.                 Right for  legal advice 

 I.       Everyone  has the  right  for obtaining  qualified  legal  advice. 

 II.      In   specific  cases   envisaged  by  legislation  legal  advice  shall  be rendered free, at the 
          governmental  expense. 

 III.     Every  citizen  has  the  right  for  the  lawyer's  advice  from  the  moment  of  detention,  arrest  or 
          accusation  with crime  by  competent  state bodies. 

Article  62.                 Inadmissibility  of change of legal jurisdiction 

 Everyone  has  the  right  for consideration  of his/her  case  in  the law court specified by the legislation. 
 Case  of the  person  shall not  be  considered  in  other law  court without  the person's  consent. 

Article  63.                 Presumption  of innocence 

 I.       Everyone  is  entitled  for  presumption  of innocence.  Everyone  who  is  accused  of crime  shall 
          be  considered  innocent  until  his  guilt  is  proved  legally  and  if no  verdict of law court has 
          been  brought  into  force. 

 II.      A person under  suspicion of crime  must  not be  considered  guilty. 

 III.     A person  accused  of crime  does not  need to  prove  his/her  innocence. 

 IV.      Proofs received  against the  law must not  be used when  administering justice. 

V.        Nobody  may be  accused  of crime  without  the verdict  of law  court. 

Article  64.                 Inadmissibility  of repeated conviction for  one and the same  crime 

Nobody  may  be  repeatedly  sentenced  for one  and the  same crime. 

Article  65.                 Right for  repeated appeal to  the law  court 

 Every  person  convicted  by  the  law  court  has  the  right  to  appeal,  as  specified  by  the  law,  to  the 
higher  law  court  asking  for reconsideration  of the  verdict  and  also  for pardon  and  mitigation  of the 
 sentence. 


Article  66.                 Inadmissibility  of testifying  against relations 

Nobody   may  be   forced  to  testify   against  him/herself,  wife   (husband),  children,  parents,  brother, 
 sister. Complete list of relations  against whom testifying  is not  obligatory  is  specified by  law. 

Article  67.                 Rights  of Those Detained, Arrested  and Accused  of a  Crime 

 I.      Every  person  who  has  been  detained,  arrested,  accused  of a  crime  by  an  authorized  state body 
 shall  be   informed  immediately   about  his  or  her  rights,  and  reasons  for  the  detention,  arrest,  and 
 institution  of criminal proceedings  shall  be  explained. 

 II.      Every  person accused  of a criminal  offence  shall be heard before  being  sentenced. 

Article  68.                 Right for  compensation  of losses 

 I.       Rights  of the person  suffered  from crime  and also  from usurpation  of power  are protected  by 
          law.  Suffered  person  has  the  right  to  take  part  in  administration  of justice  and  demand  for 
          compensation  of losses. 

 II.      Everyone  has  the  right  for  compensation  by  the  state  of  losses  borne  as  a  result  of illegal 
          actions  or non-action  of state bodies  or their officials. 

Article  69.                 Right  offoreign  citizens  and stateless persons 

 I.       Foreign  citizens  and  stateless  persons   staying  in  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may   enjoy  all 
          rights  and  must  fulfil  all  obligations  like  citizens of the Azerbaijan Republic if not specified 
          by  legislation  or  international   agreement  in  which  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  one  of the 
          parties. 

 II.      Rights     and   liberties     of  foreign   citizens and stateless persons permanently living or 
          temporarily       staying  on  the  territory of the Azerbaijan Republic may be restricted only 
          according  to  international  legal  standards  and  laws  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article   70.                Right for political  refuge 

 I.       In  accordance  with  recognized  international  legal  standards  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  grants 
          political refuge  to foreign  citizens  and stateless  persons. 

 II.      Extradition  of persons  persecuted  for  their  political  beliefs  and also  for  acts which are not 
          regarded  as  crime  in the  Azerbaijan Republic  is  not permitted. 

Article   71.                 Guarantees of Human  and Civil Rights  and Freedoms 

 I.      To   observe   and  to   protect   the   human   and   civil   rights and freedoms established by the 
 Constitution is  the duty of legislative,  executive  and judicial  bodies. 

 II.      No  one  can limit the implementation  of human and  civil rights  and  freedoms.  Everyone's rights 
 and  freedoms  are  restricted  on the grounds  provided  for in this Constitution and laws, as well as by the 
rights  and  freedoms  of others. 

 III.    Implementation  of human  and  civil rights  and  freedoms  can be  limited partially  and temporarily, 
 taking  into  account  international  obligations  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  when  a war, state of martial 
 law  and  state  of emergency,  as  well  as  military  mobilization  is  announced.  The  population  shall  be 
 informed in advance  about the rights  and freedoms that have  been  limited. 

 IV.      Under  no  circumstances  can  anyone  be  forced  to  state  his  or  her  religion,  religious  beliefs, 
 thoughts  and views,  and cannot be  charged  for doing  so. 

 V.         None  of the  provisions  of this  Constitution  can  be  interpreted  as  a  provision  targeting  the 
 revocation  of human  and  civil rights  and freedoms. 

 VI.         Human   and  civil  rights  and  freedoms  are   expressly   enforced  within  the  territory   of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

 VII.      Disputes  related  to  violation  of human  and  civil  rights  and  freedoms   shall  be  resolved  by 
 courts. 

 VIII.     No  one  bears  responsibility  for the  action that was not  a violation  of the law when  committed. 
 If a  new  law,  adopted  after  the  violation  took  place,  introduces  no  accountability  for  such  actions  or 
 mitigates them, the  new law shall  apply. 

 IX.       Everyone  may  conduct  actions  not  prohibited  by  law  and  no  one  may  be  forced  to  conduct 
 actions  not envisaged  by  law. 

 X.         The  state  institutions  may  function  only  on the  basis  of this  Constitution, in the manner and 
 within the boundaries  prescribed  by  law. 

 CHAPTER  IV.                Main  responsibilities  of citizens 

Article   72.                Basis  of Citizens'Duties 

 I.        Every  person  bears  duties,  followed  from rights and freedoms, to the state and  society. Duties 
 may be  established  for anyone  only  by this  Constitution or law. 
 II.       Every  person  must follow the  Constitution  and the  laws  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  respect 
 other persons'  rights and  freedoms,  and  implement  other  duties defined  by the  law. 
 III.    Lack  of awareness  of the  law does not relieve  one  of one's responsibility. 

Article   73.                 Taxes and other state  duties 

 I.       Everyone  must pay  taxes  and other  state  duties in-time  and in full  volume  as  required. 

          Nobody  may be  forced to pay  taxes  and other  state  duties  if they  are not  envisaged  in the  law 
          and  in excess  of amount  specified  therein. 

Article   74.                Loyalty  to  motherland 

 I.       Loyalty to  motherland  is  sacred. 

 II.      Persons  working   in  legislative,  executive  or judicial  power  bodies  who  were   elected  and 
          appointed  to  their  posts  are  responsible   for  accurate  and  conscientious   fulfilment  of their 
          obligations  and, whenever required  by  the  law, make  an oath. 

 III.     Person  working   in  legislative,   executive   or judicial   power  bodies  who  was   elected  and 
          appointed  to  his/her  post  and  made  an  oath  regarding  the  Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  shall  be  considered  dismissed  and  will  not be  able  to  take  this  position  if he/she 
          was   accused  in  crime   against  the   state,   including  rebellion   or  state  coup   and  has  been 
          sentenced based  on this  accusation. 

Article   75.                 Respect  to  State Symbols 

 I.       Every  citizen  must  respect  the  state  symbols  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  - its flag, state 
 emblem, and  anthem. 

 II.      Expression  of disrespect to the  state  symbols  shall involve  liability  as  determined  by law. 

Article   76.                Defence  of motherland 

 I.       Defence  of motherland  is  duty  of  any  citizen.  Citizens  of the  Republic  serve  in  the  army 
          according  to  legislation. 

 II.      If  beliefs   of  citizens   come   into   conflict  with   service   in  the army then in some cases 
          envisaged  by  legislation  alternative  service  instead  of regular  army  service  is permitted. 

Article     77.              Protection  of historical and cultural memorials 

 Every  citizen  is responsible  for protection  of historical  and cultural memorials. 

Article   78.                Protection  of environment 

 Every  citizen  is responsible  for protection  of environment. 

Article   79.                Inadmissibility of fulfilment of  obligations  contradicting   the legislation 

No   one  may  be   forced  to  carry   out  obligations  contradicting   the   Constitution  and  laws   of the 
Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  80.                 Responsibility 

Violation  of provisions  of the  present  Constitution  and  laws  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  including 
usurpation  of rights  and  liberties  and  also  failure  to  fulfil  responsibilities specified in the present 
 Constitution  and  laws  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  are persecuted. 

                                                        Section  3 
                                                     State  power 

 CHAPTER   V.               Legislative power 

Article  81.                Implementation  of legislative power 

 Legislative  power  in  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  implemented  by  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan 
 Republic. 

Article  82.                Number  of deputies  in Milli Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  consists  of 125  deputies. 

Article  83.                Procedure  of elections  of deputies  of Milli Majlis  of the Azerbaijan 
                            Republic 

 Deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  are  elected  based  on  majority  voting  systems 
 and general,  equal  and direct  elections  by  way  of free,  individual  and  secret voting. 

Article  84.                 Term  of Office  of the  Call  of the Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic   of 
                            Azerbaijan 

 I.       The  term  of office  of each callof the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is five years. In 
 case  the  conduct  of elections  to the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  may not be  held  due to 
military  operations  under  a  state  of war,  the  term  of  office  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of 
Azerbaijan  shall  be  extended  until the  end  of military  operations.  The  decision  of this matter  shall  be 
 adopted  by the  Constitutional  Court  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  on the basis  of the  application  of the 
 state body  organizing  elections  (referendum). 

 II.     Elections  to  each  call of the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan are held every five years, 
 on the  first Sunday  of November. 

 III.    The  term  of office  of the  members of the Milli Majlis is limited with the term of office of the 
 call  of the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

 IV.     If by-elections  are  held to replace  the  dismissed members  of the  Milli Majlis  of the  Republic  of 
Azerbaijan,  the  term  of office  of the  newly  elected  member  shall  be  limited  to  the  remaining  term  of 
 office  of the  dismissed member. 

Article  85.                Requirements  to  candidates  to  the posts  of deputies  of Milli Majlis 
                            of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Every  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  not  younger  than  25  may  be  elected  the  deputy  of 
          Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  in an  established  order. 

 II.      Persons  having  double  citizenship,  those having  obligations  to  other  states, those  working  in 
          the  bodies  of executive  or judicial  power, persons  involved  in  other  payable  activity  except

          scientific,  pedagogical   and  creative  activity,  religious  men,  persons  whose  incapacity  has 
          been  confirmed  by  law  court,  those  condemned  for  grave  crime,  serving  a  sentence  due  to 
          verdict  of  law  court  may  not  be   elected  the   deputies   of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic. 

Article  86.                 Inspection  and approval of results  of elections  of deputies  of Milli 
                             Majlis  of the Azerbaian  Republic 

Accuracy  of results  of elections  is  checked  and approved  by  Constitutional  Court  of the  Azerbaijan 
 Republic  as  specified  in the  law. 

Article  87.                 End  of the  term  of authority  of  deputies  of Milli  Majlis   of  the 
                             Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Term  of  authority  of  deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  ends  on  a  day  of 
          first meeting  of new calling  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 II.      Elections  of deputies  to  replace  those  who  left  Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic shall 
          not be held  if less  than  25  days  remains  to the  end of term  of authority  of Milli  Majlis of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  will have  powers  after  authority  of 83  of its deputies 
          has been  approved. 

Article  88.                 Sessions  of the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaian 

 I.     The  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  assemble  for  two  - spring  and  autumn  - 
 sessions  annually. 

 The  first meeting  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  be  called  from the  date when 
 the  mandates  of  83  members  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  are  approved,  but  no 
 later than a week. 

 The  date  of the  first  meeting  of the  Milli Majlis  of the  Republic of Azerbaijan shall be  determined  by 
 the  Constitutional  Court  if the mandates  of 83  members  are  not  approved  by  October  10  or March  10 
 after the  elections  to the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

 II.     Extraordinary   sessions  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan shall be called by  the 
 Chairperson  of the Milli  Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  based  on the  demand  of the  President of 
 the Republic  of Azerbaijan  or of 42  members  of the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

 III.    The  agenda  for  an extraordinary  session  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall 
be  determined  by  those  who  demand  such  a  session.  The  work  of an  extraordinary  session  shall  be 
 considered finished upon  completion of the  issues on the  agenda. 

 IV.     The  assemblies  of the  sessions  of the Milli  Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  are  open to the 
public.  An  assembly  of the  session  of the  Milli  Majlis  may be  closed  to  the  public  upon the  claim  of 
 83  members  of parliament or the proposal  by the  President of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

Article  89.                Deprivation  of deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaian  Republic 
                             of their mandates  and loss  of powers  by  the  deputy  of Milli Majlis 
                             of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       The   deputy   of  Milli   Majlis   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   looses  his/her  mandate in  the 
          following  cases: 
          1.       whenever  during the  elections  there was  falsification  in calculation  of votes; 
          2.       on    giving   up    the   citizenship      of  the Azerbaijan Republic or accepting other 
                   citizenship; 
          3.       on commitment of crime  and whenever there  is  valid verdict  of law court; 
          4.       on  taking  position  in  state  bodies,  post  in  religious   organizations,  involvement in 
                   business,     commercial       or  other   paid  activity (except scientific, pedagogical and 
                   creative  activity); 
          5.       on  a voluntary  basis; 

          Decision  about  deprivation  of the  deputy  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  of his 
          mandate  is taken  as  specified  in legislation. 

 II.      Whenever  deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   are  not  able  to  fulfil  their 
          obligations   and  in  other  cases   specified  by  law  their  authority   is  considered  terminated. 
          Procedure  of taking  respective  decision  is  determined by  the  law. 

Article  90.                Immunity  of deputies  of Milli Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       A  deputy  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  enjoys  immunity  during the  whole  term 
          of his powers.  Except  cases  when  the  deputy  may  be  caught  in  the  act  of crime,  the  deputy 
          of  Milli  Majlis  of  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may  not  be  called  to  criminal  responsibility 
          during  the  whole  term  of  his/her  authority,  arrested,   disciplinary   measures   may  not  be 
          applied  to  him  by  law  court,  he  may  not  be   searched.  The  deputy  of Milli  Majlis  of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  arrested  only  if he/she  has  been  caught  at  a  place  of crime.  In 
          such  case  the  body  which  detained  the  deputy  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic 
          must  immediately notify  General  Procurator  of the Azerbaijan Republic  about the  fact. 

 II.      Immunity  of  deputy  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  might  be   stopped  only  by 
          decision   of  Milli  Majlis   of  the  Azerbaijan Republic based on   application   of  General 
          Procurator  of the Azerbaijan Republic. 

Article  91.                Prohibition  on  institution of proceedings   against deputies  of Milli 
                            Majlis  of the Azerbaian  Republic 

 Deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  cannot be made  responsible  for their activity  in 
 Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  voting  in  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   and 
 statements  made   in  Milli  Majlis   of the  Azerbaijan  Republic.   Without  the   deputies'   consent,   in 
 connection with  such  cases,  they  are not  obliged  to give  explanations  and  evidence. 

Article  92.                 Organization   of  Work   of  the  Milli  Majlis of  the  Republic of Azerbaijan 

 The Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  determine  its regulations  of work and establish its 
bodies  including  election  of chairperson  and  deputies,  organization  of committees  and  commissions, 
 establishment  of counting  chamber. 

Article  93.                 Acts  of Milli Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  accepts  Constitutional  laws  and  decrees  regarding 
          the  questions  of its  competence. 

 II.      Constitutional  laws,  laws  and decrees  are  taken in  Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  in 
          an  order  specified  in the present  Constitution. 

 III.     Deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  exercise their  voting right personally. 

 IV.      Specific  orders  to the bodies  of executive  power  and  law  courts  cannot be  envisaged  in  laws 
          and  decrees  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  94.                  General  rules   established   by Milli   Majlis of the Azerbaijan Republic 

 I.       Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  establishes  general  rules  concerning  the  following 
          matters: 
           1.       use   of  rights and liberties of  a  person and citizen  specified  in  the   present 
                    Constitution,  state  guarantees  of these rights  and liberties; 
          2.        elections  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan Republic; 
          3.        elections  to  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  status  of deputies  of Milli 
                    Majlis  of the Azerbaijan Republic; 
          4.        referendum; 
          5.       judicial  system and status  of judges;  procurator's  office, the bar and  notary's offices; 
          6.        legal proceedings,  execution  of court verdicts; 
          7.        elections to  municipalities  and status  of municipalities; 
          8.        state  of emergency;  martial  law; 
          9.        state  awards; 
           10.      status  of physical  persons  and legal entities; 
          11.       objects  of civil law; 
           12.      transactions,  civil-legal  agreements,  representation  and  inheritance; 
           13.      right  of property,  including  legal  regime  of  state,  private  and  municipal  property, 
                    right  of intellectual  property,  other proprietary  rights;  liability  right; 
           14.      family relationships,  including  guardianship  and trusteeship; 
          15.       basis  of financial  activity-taxes,  duties  and charges; 
           16.      labor relationships  and social  maintenance; 
           17.      interpretation  of crime  and other  violations  of law;  establishment  of responsibility  for 
                    these  acts; 
           18.      defence  and military  service; 
           19.      governmental  employment; 
           20.      basis  of security; 
          21.       territorial  arrangement;  regime  of state borders; 
           22.      ratification  and  denunciation  of international  treaties; 
           23.      communications  and transport; 
           24.      statistics; metrology  and standards; 
           25.      customs; 

          26.       commerce  and stock exchange  activity; 
          27.       banking  business,  accounting,  insurance. 

 II.      As  per  questions  specified  in paragraphs  2,  3, 4  of the present  Article the  laws  are  approved 
          by majority  of 83  votes,  as per other  questions-by  majority  of 63  votes. 

 III.     The  first part  of the present Article  might be  supplemented  with the  Constitutional  law. 

Article  95.                 Issues Resolved  by  the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan 

 I.       Resolution  of the  following issues shall be responsibilities of the Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of 
Azerbaijan: 
 1.     organization  of work of the  Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 2.     establishment   of  diplomatic   representations upon  recommendation of  the President of  the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 3.     administrative-territorial  division; 
 4.      approval   and   termination   of  interstate and intergovernmental agreements containing rules 
 contrary to the laws  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 5.      approval   of  the   state   budget   upon  recommendation of  the President of the Republic   of 
Azerbaijan,  and control  over  its  implementation; 
 6.     electing human  rights  commissioner  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  upon  the  recommendation  of 
 the President of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 7.     approval  of military  doctrine  of the  Republic  of  Azerbaijan  upon  the  recommendation  of the 
 President of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 8.     approval  of the decrees  of the  President of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  in the  cases  established  by 
 this  Constitution; 
 9.      giving  consent to appoint  Prime Minister of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  upon the 
recommendation  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 10.   appointing judges  of the  Constitutional  Court of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan, Supreme  Court of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan  and  Court  of Appeal  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  upon  recommendation  of 
 the President of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 11.    giving  consent  to  appoint  or to  dismiss  General  Prosecutor  of   the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  upon 
recommendation  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 12.    dismissing  the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  based  on presidential  impeachment  upon 
recommendation  of the  Constitutional  Court of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 13.    dismissing judges  upon recommendation  of the President of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 14.    resolution of the  issue on trust to the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 15.    appointing  and  dismissing the members  of the Board  of Directors  of the Central National  Bank  of 
 the Republic  of Azerbaijan  upon recommendation  of the  President of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 16.    giving   consent   to   the      Armed   Forces of  the Republic of Azerbaijan being    involved     in 
 implementation  of duties  that are not related to their  assignment; 
 17.   giving  consent  to  announcement  of war  or to  peace  agreements  upon  request  of the  President  of 
 the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 18.   determination  of referendum; 
 19.   amnesty;  and 
 20.   hearing  of the municipality  reports. 

 II.      The  laws on issues mentioned  in paragraphs  1-5  of this Article  shall pass  with majority  of votes 
 of 63  members  of the  Milli  Majlis,  and  decisions  on  other  issues  shall  be  made  with  the  same  rule  if 
 other rules are not considered  by this  Constitution. 

 III.    Decisions      shall   also   be   made   on   other issues under responsibilities of  the Milli Majlis 
 established  by  this  Constitution,  issues  on organization  of work  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic of 
 Azerbaijan,  issues  on which  position  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  is  necessary  to 
be  stated. 

 IV.     The  first part  of this Article  can be  amended  by  Constitutional  law. 

Article  96.                 Right  of Legislative  Initiative 

 I.      Right  of legislative  initiative (the right to submit draft laws and other issues to  the discussion of 
 the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan)  belongs  to  the  members  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan,  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  Supreme  Court  of the  Republic  of 
 Azerbaijan,  40  thousand  citizens  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  enjoying  suffrage,  Prosecutor's  Office 
 of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  and  Supreme Majlis  of Nakhchivan Autonomous  Republic. 

 II.      Draft  laws  or  decisions   submitted  to  the  discussion  of the  Milli Majlis of the Republic  of 
 Azerbaijan   in  the  manner   of  legislative  initiative  by  the  President  of the  Republic   of  Azerbaijan, 
 Supreme  Court  of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan,  40  thousand  citizens  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan 
 enjoying  suffrage,  Prosecutor's  Office  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  Supreme  Majlis  of Nakhchivan 
 Autonomous  Republic  shall  be  brought  to  discussion  the  way  they  have  been  submitted  and  shall  be 
 voted  on. 

 III.     Changes  to  such  laws  or  decisions  can  be  made  with the  consent  of the  subject  bedy  enjoying 
 the right of legislative  initiative. 

 IV.     Draft  laws  or  decisions  submitted  by  the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,   Supreme 
 Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  40  thousand  citizens   of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  enjoying 
 suffrage,    Prosecutor's      Office     of  the    Republic      of  Azerbaijan, Supreme Majlis of Nakhchivan 
 Autonomous  Republic  shall be  voted  on within  a two-month period. 

 V.       In case  of an urgent  announcement  of a draft  law or decision by  the President  of the Republic  of 
 Azerbaijan,  Supreme  Court  of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan,   Prosecutor's  Office  of the  Republic  of 
 Azerbaijan,  Supreme Majlis  of Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic,  this period  shall  be  20  days. 

 VI.      The  manner  in  which  40  thousand  citizens  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  enjoying  suffrage 
 exercise  their right to  initiate  legislation  shall be  defined  by  law. 

 VII.      Draft  laws  and  resolutions  shall  be substantiated and the purposes for their adoption  shall  be 
 indicated. 

Article  97.                  Term for submitting laws for signing 

 I.       Drafts  of the  laws  are  submitted  to  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   for  signing 
          within  14  days  from the  day  of their acceptance. 

 II.      Urgent  draft  of the  law  is  submitted to  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  for  signing 
          within  24 hours  from the  moment  of its acceptance. 

Article  98.                   Validity  of acts  of Milli Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 If  not   specified  otherwise  in the law  and  decree of Milli Majlis of the Azerbaijan Republic 

 CHAPTER   VI.              Executive power 

Article  99.                Belonging  of executive power 

 Executive  power  in the Azerbaijan  Republic  belongs to the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  100.               Requirements   to   candidates  to   the post   of  the  President  of  the 
                            Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  not  younger  than  35,  permanently  living  on the  territory  of the 
Azerbaijan  Republic   longer  than  10  years,  possessing  voting  right,  without  previous  conviction, 
having  no  liabilities  in  other  states,  with  university  degree,  not  having  double  citizenship  may  be 
 elected the  President of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  101.               Basis of  the Elections  to   the   President   of  the   Republic of Azerbaijan 

 I.       The  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  be  elected  for  a  five  year  term  based  on 
 general,  equal  and  direct suffrage  by means  of a secret  and personal  vote. 

 II.      The President  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  be  elected  with  a majority  of the votes  of half 
the voters who participated  in the voting. 

 III.    If  such  majority  of votes  has  not  been  achieved  during  the  first  round  of voting,  the  second 
round  of voting  shall  be  held  on the  second  Sunday  after the  voting  day.  Only the  two  candidates  who 
 collected  most of the votes, or the two  candidates next in order to those  who  collected  most of the votes 
 and withdrew their  candidacies  shall participate  in the  second round. 

 IV.     The  person who  collects  majority  of votes  during  the  second  round  shall  be  considered  elected 
 President of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

V.        In case  the  conduct  of the  Presidential  Election  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan is not held due to 
military   operations  under  a  state   of  war,  the   term  of  office   of the   President  of  the Republic of 
Azerbaijan  shall  be  extended  until  the  end  of military  operations.  The  decision  on this matter shall  be 
 adopted  by the  Constitutional  Court  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  on the basis  of the  application  of the 
 state body  organizing  elections  (referendum). 

VI.      Rules  for implementation  of this Article  shall be  defined by  the law. 

Procedure  of implementation  of the present Article  is specified  in legislation. 

Article  102.               Results  of elections  of the President of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Results   of  elections   of  the  President of the Azerbaijan  Republic are officially announced  by 
 Constitutional  Court of the Azerbaijan  Republic  within  14 days  from the  day  of voting. 

Article 103.                 Oath  of a person  elected  the President of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       A person  elected the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  within  3 days  from the  day  when 
          results  of elections  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  have  been  announced,  with 
          participation  of judges  of  Constitutional  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  takes  an  oath: 
          "Carrying  out  powers  of  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan   Republic  I  swear  to  follow  the 
          Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  protect  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity  of the 
          state,  to  serve  people". 

 II.      It  is  considered  that  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  began carrying out his official 
          powers  from the  day when he took  his oath. 

Article  104.                Inability  of the President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  to  carry  out 
                             his powers 

 I.       The  President  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  is considered  having  left his position  ahead  of time 
          on  resignation,  complete  inability  to  fulfil  his powers due to illness, dismissal  from his post 
          in  cases  and in  an order envisaged  in the present  Constitution. 

 II.      When  the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  is  going to resign,  his  application  concerning 
          resignation  is  presented  to   Constitutional  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic.  Constitutional 
          Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  having  confirmed  that  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  himself  sent  in  his  resignation  makes  decision  to  accept  such  resignation.  From 
          that moment the  President  is considered  having  left his post  due to resignation. 

 III.     Having  received  notifications  about  complete  inability  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  to  fulfil  his  powers  due  to  poor  health,  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic 
          applies  to  the  Constitutional  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  for  clarification  of this  fact. 
          Should the  Constitutional  Court  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  confirm  this  fact the  question  is 
          settled. 

Article  105.                Implementation            of powers         of  the  President   of  the  Azerbaijan 
                             Republic  on his resignation 

 I.       Whenever  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  resigns   from  his  post  ahead  of time, 
          extraordinary   elections  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   are  held  within  three 
          months.  In  such  case,  until  new  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  elected,  the  Prime- 
          Minister  of Azerbaijan  Republic  will  carry  out  powers  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic. 

 II.      If  during  said  term  the  Prime-Minister  of Azerbaijan  Republic  carrying  out  powers  of the 
          President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  resigns,  becomes  incapable  of carrying  out his  powers 
          due  to  illness,  Chairman  of Milli  Majlis  of Azerbaijan  Republic  will  carry  out powers  of the 
          President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     If  Chairman   of  Milli   Majlis   of Azerbaijan   Republic   is  unable  to fulfil  powers of the 
          President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  due  to  reasons  given  in paragraph  II   of the  Present 
          Article,  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  takes  decree  about  delegation  of powers  of 
          the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  to  other  official. 

Article 106.                 Immunity  of the President of the Azerbaijan  Republic 


 The  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  enjoys  the  right  of personal  immunity. Honor  and  dignity 
 of the  President of the Azerbaijan  Republic  are  protected by  law. 

Article  107.                Dismissal  of the  President  of  the Azerbaijan   Republic from   his 
                             post 

 I.       In  case  of  grave  crime  done  by  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  the  question  of 
          dismissal  of the  President  may  be  submitted  to  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  on 
          initiative    of  Constitutional   Court   of  the   Azerbaijan  Republic  ased on conclusions of 
           Supreme  Court of the Azerbaijan  Republic  presented  within  30  days. 

 II.      The  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  dismissed  from  his post by  decree  of Milli 
          Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  taken  by  majority  of 95  votes  of deputies.  This  decree  is 
          signed by  the  Chairman  of Constitutional  Court of the Azerbaijan  Republic.  If Constitutional 
          Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  fails  to  sign  said  decree  within  one week  it  shall  not  come 
          into  force. 

 III.     Decree  about  dismissal  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  from  his  post  must  be 
          accepted  within  2   months  from  the   date   of  application   of  Constitutional   Court   of  the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  to  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic.  If said  decree  is  not  taken 
          within   said  term,   then  accusation   against   the   President of  the  Azerbaijan Republic is 
          considered  rejected. 

Article  108. Material Security  of the President of the Republic  of Azerbaijan 

 I.       The  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  and  his  or  her family shall be secured materially 
 by  the  state.  Security  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  and  his or her family shall be 
provided by  a special  security  service. 

 II.      Regulations  for the  material  security  of the  person  who  was  elected  President  of the  Republic 
 of Azerbaijan  in the past  shall be  defined by  a Constitutional  law. 

Article  109.                Responsibilities  of the President of the Republic  of Azerbaijan 

 The President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan: 

 1)     Determines  elections  to the Milli  Majlis of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 

 2)     Submits the  state budget  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  to the  Milli Majlis  for approval; 

 3)     Approves  state  economic  and  social  programs; 

 4)     With the  consent  of the  Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  appoints the  Prime Minister  of 
 the Republic  of Azerbaijan;  dismisses the Prime  Minister of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 

 5)     Appoints  and  dismisses  members  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 chairs the meetings  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  if necessary; 

 6)     Makes  a decision  on the resignation  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan;

7)       Establishes   central   and   local   executive  bodies   within  the expenses allocated for executive 
authorities  from the  state budget  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 

8)      Terminates   decisions  and  ordinances  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  and  Cabinet  of Ministers  of 
Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic;  and acts  of the central  and local  authorities; 

9)       Recommends  the   Milli  Majlis   of  the  Republic   of  Azerbaijan   on  appointing  judges  to  the 
Constitutional  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  Supreme  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  and 
the  courts  of  appeal;  appoints  judges   to  other  courts  of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan;   appoints  the 
Attorney  General  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  with the  consent  of the Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of 
Azerbaijan; 

 10)   Recommends  the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan   on  appointing   or  dismissing  the 
members  of  the  Board  of Directors   of the  Central  Natiinal  Bank  of the  Republic  of  Azerbaijan; 
appoints  the  Chairman  of the  Central  Bank  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  from  the  members  of the 
Governing  Board of the  Central  Bank of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

 11)  Submits the military  doctrine  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  to the  Milli Majlis  for approval; 

 12)   Appoints   and  dismisses  the staff  for  high  command of  Armed Forces of  the  Republic of 
Azerbaijan; 

 13)  Organizes  the Administration  Executive Apparatus  of the  President  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan 
and  appoints its  Heads; 

 14)    Recommends   the  Milli Majlis of  the  Republic of  Azerbaijan  on electing human rights 
commissioner  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 

 15)   Recommends  the  Milli  Majlis   of the  Republic   of  Azerbaijan  on  establishment  of  diplomatic 
representations        abroad      in  international  organizations, appoints  and withdraws       diplomatic 
representatives  abroad and  in international  organizations; 

 16)   Accepts  credentials  of diplomatic representatives  of foreign  countries; 

 17)   Signs  interstate  and  intergovernmental  international  agreements;   submits  interstate  inAematienal 
and  intergovernmental  agreements  containing  rules  contrary  to the  laws of the Republic  of Azerbaijan, 
to the  Milli Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  for approval  or termination;  signs the  certificates; 

 18)   Determines  referendum; 

 19)  Signs  laws and publishes  them; 

20)  Resolves  issues  on citizenship; 

21)   Resolves  issues  on granting  political  asylum; 

22)  Pardons; 

23)   Awards  with  state  awards; 

24)   Grants  highest military  and highest  special ranks; 

 25)   Announces   general   or  partial  military   mobilization, as well as demobilizes  those   who  were 
 mobilized; 

 26)   Makes  decisions  on the  call  of citizens  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  to limited military service, 
 and  on release  of military  servants who were  on limited military  service; 

 27)   Establishes  the  Security  Council  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 

 28)   Recommends  to  the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  on  giving  consent  to  the  Armed 
 Forces to  implement  duties that are not under  its responsibilities; 

 29)  Declares  emergency  and military  situations; 

 30)   Declares  war  and  concludes peace  agreements  with the  consent  of the  Milli Majlis  of the  Republic 
 of Azerbaijan; 

 31)  Establishes  special  security  services within the expenses allocated  for  such purposes  from the  state 
budget  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 

 32)   Resolves   other  issues  not  under   the  responsibilities of  the   Milli  Majlis of the Republic of 
 Azerbaijan  and  of the judiciary  established  by this  Constitution. 

Article  110.                Signing of the laws 

 I.       The   President   of  the  Azerbaijan Republic signs  the laws within  56   days   after   their 
          presentation.  If the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  has  objections  against  a law  he may 
          return  it  to  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  within  specified  term  without  signing, 
          together with  his  comments. 

 II.       Should the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  fail to  sign Constitutional  laws  they  will not 
          come  into  force.  If Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  accepts  by  majority  of 95  votes 
          laws  that have  been  accepted previously  by  majority  of 83  votes,  and by  majority  of 83  votes 
          the  laws  that  have  been  accepted  previously  by  majority  of 63  votes,  said  laws  come  into 
          force  after repeated voting. 

Article  111.                Declaration  of martial law 

 In   cases    of  actual occupation  of  some  part of the  territory  of  the Azerbaijan Republic, 
 announcement  of war by  foreign  country  or countries  against the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  blockade  of 
 the  territory   of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  also  whenever  there  is  real  danger  of armed  attack 
 against  the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  blockade  of the  territory   of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  also  in 
 case  of real  threat  of such blockade  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  announces  martial  law 
 all over  the  territory  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  or in  individual  areas,  and  within  24  hours  submits 
respective  decree  for  approval  by  Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  112.                State  of emergency 

 Whenever  natural  calamities  take  place,  epidemic,  epizootic,  grave  ecological  and  other  disasters 
 and  also  on  accomplishment   of  acts  aimed  to  violation   of territorial  integrity  of the  Azerbaijan 
 Republic,  revolt   or  state   coup,   with  mass   disorders   accompanied   by   violence,  other conflicts 
 threatening   life  and   safety of  citizens, or normal activity of  state bodies, the  President of the 
 Azerbaijan  Republic  announces  state  of emergency  in  individual  areas  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic 
 and  within  24  hours   submits  respective   decree  for  approval  by   Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan 
 Republic. 

Article  113.               Acts  of the President of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Establishing  general  procedures  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  issues  decrees,  as 
          per  all  other questions -  he  issues  orders. 

 II.      If not  specified  otherwise  in  decrees  and  orders  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic 
          they  become  valid  from the  day  of their publication. 

Article  114.               Status of the  Cabinet of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       For   implementation        of   executive  powers the  President of  the Azerbaijan Republic 
          establishes  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan Republic. 

 II.      Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  the  highest  body  of executive  power  of 
          the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     Cabinet   of Ministers   of the  Azerbaijan   Republic  is  subordinate   to  the  President  of  the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  and reports  to him. 

 IV.      Procedure  of activity  of Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  defined  by  the 
          President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  115.                Composition  of Cabinet of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Cabinet   of  Ministers       of  the   Azerbaijan Republic includes Prime-minister of  the   Azerbaijan 
 Republic,  his deputies,  ministers  and heads  of other  central bodies  of executive power. 

Article  116.               Resignation  of Cabinet of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 On  a day  when newly  elected  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  comes into  his rights  and begins 
 carrying  out his powers  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  resigns. 

Article  117.               Meetings  of the  Cabinet of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

As  a  rule,  Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  takes  chair  at  the  meetings  of the  Cabinet  of 
 Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  118.               Procedure   of  appointment  of Prime-minister  of  the  Azerbaijan 
                            Republic 

 I.       Prime-minister   of Azerbaijan   Republic   is   appointed  by  the  President   of  the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  on consent of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan Republic. 

 II.      Proposed  candidature  for the  post of Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  is  submitted 
          for   consideration   to   Milli   Majlis     of  the  Azerbaijan Republic by   the President of  the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  not   later  than  one  month  from  the  day  when  the  President  begins 
          carrying  out his powers,  or not  later  than two  weeks  from  the  day  of resignation  of Cabinet 
          of Ministers  of  
                              the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  takes  decision  concerning  the  candidate  to  the  post 
          of Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  not  later  than  within  one  week  from  the  day 
          when such candidature  has  been proposed. Should said procedure  be violated, or 
          candidatures  proposed  by  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  for  the  post  of Prime- 
          minister   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic  be   rejected   three  times,  then  the  President   of  the 
          Azerbaijan      Republic     may   appoint   Prime-minister of  the   Azerbaijan Republic without 
          consent  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  119.               Authority  of Cabinet of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic: 
          *    prepares  draft  of state  budget  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  submits  it to  the  President 
              of the Azerbaijan  Republic; 
          *    provides  implementation  of state budget  of the Azerbaijan  Republic; 
          *    provides  implementation  of financial-credit  and monetary  policy; 
          *    provides  implementation  of state  economic programs; 
          *    provides  implementation  of state  social  programs; 
          *    carries  out  control  over  ministries  and  other  central  bodies  of executive  power,  annuls 
              their acts; 
          *    solves  other questions  delegated  to  it by  the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  120.               Acts  of Cabinet of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Establishing  general  procedures   Cabinet  of  Ministers   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic  issues 
          decrees,  as  per  all  other questions  -  it  issues  orders. 

 II.      If not  specified  otherwise  in  decrees  and  orders  of  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic,  they  become  valid  from the  day  of their publication. 

Article  121.               Requirements  to  candidates  to  the posts  of members  of Cabinet of 
                            Ministers  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  shall  be  a  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  not 
          younger  than  30,  having  voting  right,  with  university  degree,  having  no  liabilities  in  other 
          states. 

 II.      Deputy  Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  minister,  head  of other  central  body  of 
          executive  power  shall  be  a  citizen  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  not  younger  than  25,  having 
          voting  right, with  university  degree,  having no  liabilities  in other  states. 

Article  122.               Requirements to   members  of   Cabinet  of  Ministers  of the 
                            Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  his  deputies,  ministers,  heads  of other  central  bodies  of 
 executive     power     may   not     occupy     any    posts,   irrespective of  the  procedure - elections or 
 appointment,  may  not  be   involved   in  business,   commercial   and  other  payable   activity   except 

 scientific,  pedagogical  and  creative  activity,  may  not  get remuneration  other than  their  wages  and 
money  for scientific, pedagogical  and creative  activity. 

Article  123.               Immunity  of Prime-minister of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  enjoys  immunity  during  the  whole  term  of his 
          powers. 

 II.      Prime-minister of  the Azerbaijan Republic may not be arrested,    called   to    criminal 
          responsibility   except   cases  when  he   has  been   caught   in  the   act  of  crime,   disciplinary 
          measures  may not  be  applied to  him by  law court, he  may not be  searched. 

 III.     Prime-minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  arrested  if he  has  been  caught  in the  act 
          of crime.  In  such  case  body  detained  the  deputy  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic 
          must  immediately notify  General  Procurator  of the Azerbaijan Republic  about the  fact. 

 IV.      Immunity  of  Prime-  minister  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  might  be   stopped  only  by   the 
          President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  based  on  application  of  General  Procurator   of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  124.               Local  bodies  of executive power 

 Heads  of executive  power bodies  carry  out executive  power  locally. 

 Heads  of executive  power  bodies  are  appointed  to  their  posts  and  dismissed  by  the  President  of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     Limits  of authority  of local  executive  power  bodies  are  determined  by  the  President  of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 CHAPTER   VII. Judicial power 

Article  125.               Judicial  
                                         Power 

 I.       Judicial  power  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  can  only  be  exercised  by  courts  through  a  fair 
trial. 

 II.      Judicial  power  shall  be  exercised  by  the  Constitutional  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan, 
 Supreme  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  courts  of appeal  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan,  general 
 courts and  other  specialized  courts  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

 III.     Judicial   power   shall  be   exercised   by the Constitution, through civil and criminal court 
proceedings  and through  other means provided  by the  law. 

 IV.       The  Prosecutor's  Office  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan and the defense shall be  parts  of the 
 criminal  court proceeding. 

V.         Structure of the  court  and rules  for court proceedings  shall  be  defined by  the law. 

VI.         Implementation  of legal  methods  that  are  not established  for changing  the  responsibilities  of 
 courts, and  establishment  of emergency  courts  shall be  prohibited. 

 VII.      Court proceeding  shall provide  for the  discovery  of the truth. 

Article  126.                Requirements  to  candidates to judges posts 

 I.       Judges  shall  be  citizens  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  not younger  than  30,  having voting  right, 
          higher juridical  education  and at  least  5-year working  experience  in the  sphere  of law. 

 II.      Judges   may   not   occupy   any   other  posts,   irrespective   of  the  procedure -   elections or 
          appointment,  may  not  be   involved   in  business,   commercial   and  other  payable activity, 
          except  scientific,  pedagogical  and  creative  activity, may not be  involved  in political  activity 
          and join  political  parties,  may  not  get  remuneration  other  than  their  wages  and  money  for 
          scientific,  pedagogical  and  creative activity. 

Article  127.                Independence of judges, main  principles and  conditions of implementation of justice 

 I.       Judges  are  independent,  they  are  subordinate  only to  Constitution  and laws  of the Azerbaijan 
          Republic,  they  cannot be replaced  during the  term of their authority. 

 II.      In  consideration  of legal  cases judges  must  be  impartial,  fair, they  should  provide juridical 
          equality  of parties,  act based  on facts  and according  to the  law. 

 III.     Direct  and  indirect  restriction  of legal  proceedings  from  somebody's  part  and  due  to  some 
          reason,  illegal  influence,  threats  and  interference  are not  allowed. 

 IV.      Justice  shall be  implemented  based  on equality  of citizens before  the  law and law  court. 

 V.       In all  law  courts hearing  of legal  cases  shall be  open. 

 VI.      It  is  allowed  to  have  closed  hearing  of legal  cases  only if the law court decides  that  open 
          hearings  may  result  in  disclosure  of state,  professional  or  commercial  secrets, or that it  is 
          necessary  to keep  confidentiality  with respect  to personal  or family  life. 

 VII.     Except      cases    envisaged      by    law   it   is   prohibited to carry out legal proceedings by 
          correspondence. 

 VIII.    Law proceedings  are carried  out based  on the principle  of contest. 

 IX.      Everyone  has the  right  for defence  at all  stages of legal proceedings. 

X.        Justice  is based  on presumption  of innocence. 

XI.       In  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   legal  proceedings are   carried out in state language of  the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  or  in  a  language  of majority  of population  in  specific  area.  Persons- 
          participants  of legal  proceedings  not  knowing  the  language  of proceedings  have  the  right  to 
          be   acquainted   with   materials   of  proceedings,   to   take   part   in   legal proceedings using 
          interpreter,  to make  statements  in the  law court  in their native  language. 

Article  128.                Immunity  ofjudges 

 I.       Judges  are  immune. 

 II.      Ajudge  may be  called to  criminal  responsibility  only  in accordance  with law. 

 III.     Authority  of judges  might be  stopped only based  on reasons  and rules  envisaged  by  the  law. 

 IV.      Whenever  judges          commit   crime,   the President of  the  Azerbaijan Republic, based on 
          conclusions  of  Supreme   Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  may  make   statement  in  Milli 
          Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  with  the  initiative  to  dismiss  judges   from  their  posts. 
          Respective  conclusions  of Supreme  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  must  be  presented  to 
          the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  within  30  days  after his request. 

V.        Decision   about  dismissal  of judges   of  Constitutional   Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic, 
          Supreme  Court of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  Economic  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic 
          is taken by  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  with majority  of 83  votes;  decision  about 
          dismissal  of other judges  is  taken  by  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  with  majority 
          of 63  votes. 

Article  129.                Court Decisions  and their Implementation 

 I.      Court  decisions       shall  be   made   on  behalf  of  the state and  their implementation shall  be 
mandatory. 

 II.     Failure  to  execute  a court  decisions  entails liability  prescribed by  law. 

 III.    A  court decision  shall  be  grounded  in law and  evidence. 

Article  130.                Constitutional Court of the Republic  ofAzerbaijan 

 I.       The  Constitutional  Court of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall be  comprised  of nine  members. 

 II.      Judges  of the  Constitutional  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  be  appointed  by  the 
 Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  with  recommendation  of the  President  of the  Republic  of 
Azerbaijan. 

 III.      The  Constitutional   Court  of  the  Republic   of Azerbaijan   shall  resolve  the  following  issues 
based upon  the request  of the  President  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan,  the  Milli Majlis  of the  Republic 
 of Azerbaijan,  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  the  Supreme  Court of the  Republic 
 of Azerbaijan,  the  Prosecutor's  Office  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  Supreme  Majlis  of Nakhchivan 
Autonomous  Republic: 

 1.     compliance  of the  laws  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  decrees  and  orders  of the  President  of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan,  decisions  of the  Milli  Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  decisions  and 
 orders  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  normative  legal  acts  of the  central 
 executive  authority  bodies  with the  Constitution  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
 2.     compliance  of the decrees  of the President  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan,  decisions  of the  Cabinet 
 of Ministers  of  the  Republic  of  Azerbaijan,  normative  legal  acts  of the  central  executive   authority 
bodies with the laws of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
3.      compliance  of decisions  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers,  normative legal acts of the central executive 
authority  bodies with  decrees  of the President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
4.       compliance       of  decisions   of  the      Supreme      Court   of  the Republic of Azerbaijan with the 
Constitution and  laws of the Republic  of Azerbaijan,  in cases  considered  by the  law; 
 5.     compliance  of municipal  acts  with  the  Constitution  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  laws  of the 
Republic  of Azerbaijan,  decrees  of the  President of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  decision  of the  Cabinet 
of Ministers  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  (in Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic,  as  well  as  with the 
Constitution  and  laws  of Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic,  decisions  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of 
Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic); 
6.      compliance  of interstate  agreements  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  that  are not  in  force  with the 
Constitution   of  the   Republic   of  Azerbaijan; compliance   of  intergovernmental agreements   of the 
Republic  of Azerbaijan  with the  Constitution  and laws of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
7.      compliance  of the  Constitution  of Nakhchivan   Autonomous  Republic,  laws,  decisions  of the 
 Supreme  Majlis  and  Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic  with the  Constitution 
of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan;  compliance  of laws  of Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic,  decision  of 
the  Cabinet  of Ministers   of Nakhchivan  Autonomous   Republic   with  the  laws  of the  Republic   of 
Azerbaijan;  compliance  of decision  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic 
with  decrees  of the  President  of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan   and  with  decisions  of the  Cabinet  of 
Ministers  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan; 
8.      disputes regarding  the  division of powers between  legislative,  executive  and judiciary  powers. 

IV.       The  Constitutional  Court  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  interpret the  Constitution  and laws 
of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  at  the  request  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  the  Milli 
Majlis  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Republic  of  Azerbaijan,  the 
 Supreme  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  the  Prosecutor's  Office  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan, 
the  Supreme  Majlis of Nakhchivan  Autonomous  Republic. 

V.        For resolution  of issues indicated in Articles 130.III.1  and  130.III.7 by  the  Constitutional  Court 
of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  everyone  has  the right  to  file  complaints to the Constitutional  Court  of 
the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  in  accordance  with  rules  specified  by  laws,  against  legal  and  normative 
acts  of executive  authorities  and  municipalities,  as  well  as  rulings  of courts which violate individuals' 
rights and  freedoms,  in order to restore the  violated rights and  freedoms. 

VI.      Within  the  rules  established  by  the  laws  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan, the courts may  request 
the  Constitutional  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  to  interpret  the  Constitution  and  laws  of the 
Republic  of Azerbaijan  regarding  enjoying human  rights  and freedoms. 

VII.       For  resolution  of the  issues  indicated  in  Articles  130.11.1 and  130.III.7 by the Constitutional 
Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  the  human rights  commissioner  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  can 
file  an  inquiry to the  Constitutional  Court  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  regarding  legal  and normative 
acts  of executive  authorities  and municipalities  as well  as rulings  of courts, which  violate human rights 
and  freedoms  in accordance  with rules  specified by  laws. 

VIII.      The    Constitutional Court of the Republic of  Azerbaijan  may  implement  other duties 
established by  this  Constitution. 

IX.        The  Constitutional  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  make  the  decisions  under  its 
competence.  The  decision of the  Constitutional  Court  shall have  mandatory  force within  the territory  of 
the  Republic  of Azerbaijan.  The  decisions  of the  Constitutional  Court  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan 
shall  be published. 

X.        Laws   and   other   acts, or their separate provisions, intergovernmental agreements of  the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  lose  their  force  within  the  timeframe  established in the  decision of the 
 Constitutional  Court   of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan.   But  interstate agreements of  the  Republic   of 
Azerbaijan  do not  come  into  force. 

Article  131.                Supreme  Court of the Republic  ofAzerbaijan 

 I.       The   Supreme  Court  of the  Republic   of Azerbaijan   is  the   supreme judicial   body  on  civil, 
 criminal  and  other issues  that  are under   general  and  specialized  court proceedings;  it  implements  fair 
trials by way  of cassation;  gives  explanations regarding the practice  of the  courts. 

 II.      With  the  recommendation  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  the  Milli  Majlis  of 
the   Republic   of  Azerbaijan   shall   appoint  the  judges   of  the   Supreme   Court   of  the  Republic   of 
Azerbaijan. 

 III.     The  decisions  of the  Supreme  Court of the Republic  of Azerbaijan  shall  be published. 

Article  132.                Courts of Appeal  of Azerbaian  Republic 

 I.       The  Courts  of Appeal  of Azerbaijan  Republic  shall  be the  higher  courts  considering  the  issues 
          falling within  their competences  according  to the legislation. 

 II.      Judges  of the  Courts  of Appeal  of Azerbaijan  Republic  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Milli  Majlis 
          of Azerbaijan  Republic  upon the  recommendation  of the  President  of Azerbaijan  Republic.. 

Article  133.                Procurator's Office  of the Azerbaian  Republic 

 I.       Via  procedure  and  in  cases  specified  by  legislation,  Procurator's  Office  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  exercises  control  over  fulfilment  and  application  of  laws;  in  cases  envisaged  by 
          legislation     it   undertakes      prosecution and carries out investigation;  supports state 
          incrimination  in  the  law  court;  brings  in  an  action  in the law court; remonstrates against 
          decisions  of law court. 

 II.      Procurator's   Office   of the  Azerbaijan   Republic  is  an  integral  centralized  body  based  on 
          subordination       of  territorial    and    specialized     procurators to  General Procurator of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     General  Procurator  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  is appointed to  his post  and dismissed  from it 
          by  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  on  consent  of Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic. 

 IV.      Deputies of General Procurator of  the Azerbaijan Republic,  procurators supervising 
          specialized      republican      procurator's      offices,  procurator of  Nakhichevan Autonomous 
          Republic  are  appointed  to  their  posts  and  dismissed  from their  posts  by  the  President of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  on recommendation  of General  Procurator  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

V.        Territorial  and  specialised  procurators  are  appointed  to their  posts  and  dismissed by  General 
          Procurator  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   on  agreement  with  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic. 

 CHAPTER   VIII.  Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic 

Article  134.              Status  ofNakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

 I.      Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  is  autonomous  state  within the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

II.       Status  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  is defined  in the present  Constitution. 

 III.    Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  is  an integral part  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 IV.     Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  laws  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,   decrees  of the 
         President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  decrees  of Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Azerbaijan 
         Republic  are obligatory  on the  territory  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic. 

V.       Constitution  and  laws  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic   accepted  by  Ali  Majlis   of 
         Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic   shall  not  contradict  respectively   to  Constitution  and 
         laws  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic;  decrees  accepted  by  Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhichevan 
         Autonomous  Republic-to  Constitution  and laws  of the Azerbaijan  Republic,  decrees  of the 
         President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  decrees  of Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Azerbaijan 
         Republic. 

VI.        The  Constitution  of Nakhchivan  Autonomy  Republic  shall  be  submitted  to the  Milli  Majlis 
           of Azerbaijan  Republic  by  the  President  of Azerbaijan  Republic  and  shall  by  approved  by 
           the  Constitutional  Law. 

Article  135.              Division  ofpowers  in Nakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

 I.      Legislative  power  in  Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  is  implemented  by  Ali  Majlis  of 
         Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic,   executive  power  - by   the   Cabinet   of Ministers   of 
         Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic, judicial   power-by   law  courts   of  Nakhichevan 
         Autonomous  Republic. 

II.      Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic   independently   settles   questions  which 
         according  to  Constitution  and  laws  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   fall  under  its  competence; 
         Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  independently  settles  questions 
         which   according   to   Constitution   and   laws   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic,   decrees of  the 
         President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  fall  under  its  competence;  law  courts  of Nakhichevan 
         Autonomous  Republic  independently  settle  questions  which  according  to  Constitution  and 
         laws  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  fall under their  competence. 

Article  136.               The highest official of Nakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

 Chairman      of  Ali   Majlis    of  Nakhichevan  Autonomous Republic is the  highest  official   of 
Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic. 

Article  137.              Ali Majlis  of Nakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

 I.      Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  consists  of 45  members. 
                
II.      Term  of authority  of Ali Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  is  5 years. 

 III.    Ali   Majlis    of  Nakhichevan       Autonomous       Republic     elects  chairman of  Ali Majlis of 
         Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic   and  his   deputies,   establishes   permanent   and   other 
         commissions. 

Article  138.              Competence  of Ali Majlis  of Nakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

I.       Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  establishes  general  procedures  concerning 
         the  following: 
         *    elections  to Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    taxes; 
         *    routes  of economic  development  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    social  maintenance; 
         *    protection  of environment; 
         *    tourism; 
         *    protection  of health,  science,  culture. 

II.      Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  accepts  laws  related to  questions  specified 
         in the present Article. 

Article  139.              Questions       solved     by   Ali   Majlis      of  Nakhichevan   Autonomous 
                           Republic 

I.       Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  takes  decisions  concerning  the  following 
         questions: 
         *    organisation  of work  in Ali  Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    approval  of the  budget  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    approval  of economic  and social  programs  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    appointment  and  dismissal of Prime-minister  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    approval  of composition  of Cabinet of Ministers  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
         *    decisions    concerning vote  of  confidence  in  Cabinet  of  Ministers  of  Nakhichevan 
             Autonomous  Republic. 

II.      Ali   Majlis   of  Nakhichevan   Autonomous   Republic issues   decree    concerning     questions 
         specified  in the present Article. 

Article  140.              Cabinet ofMinisters  ofNakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

I.       Composition  of Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  recommended 
         by  Prime-minister   of Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic   is  approved  by  Ali  Majlis   of 
         Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic. 

II.      Prime-minister      of  Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic is  appointed  by   Ali   Majlis     of 
         Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  on recommendation  by  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan 
         Republic. 

 III.    Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic: 
          *   prepares  draft  of budget  of Autonomous  Republic  and  presents   it  for  approval  by  Ali 
              Majlis  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic; 
          *   implements  the  budget  of  
                                             Autonomous  Republic; 

          *   provides  implementation  of economic programs  of Autonomous  Republic; 
          *   provides  implementation  of social  programs  of Autonomous  Republic; 
          *   settles  other questions  delegated  to  it by  the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 IV.     Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  issues  orders  and decrees. 

Article  141.              Local  executive power  in Nakhichevan Autonomous  Republic 

 In Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  heads  of local  executive  power bodies  are  appointed  by  the 
President   of  the   Azerbaijan   Republic   on  recommendation   of  the   Chairman   of  Ali   Majlis   of 
Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic. 

                                                      Section  4 
                                          Local  self-government 

 CHAPTER  IX.              Municipalities 

Article  142.              Organisation of local self-government 

I.       Local  self-government  is  carried  out by  municipalities. 

II.      Municipalities  are  formed  based  on elections. 

 III.    The  foundations  of the  status  of municipalities  shall  be  determined  by  given  Constitution. 
         The  regulations  of elections  to the  municipalities  shall be  determined  by  law. 

Article  143.              Organisation of work  of municipalities 

I.       Activity    of  municipalities is carried out by way of meetings, permanent and other 
         commissions. 

II.      Meetings  of municipalities  are  summoned by  their chairmen. 

Article  144.              Authority  of municipalities 

I.       The  following  questions  are  settled at the meetings  of municipalities: 
          *   recognition  of authority  of municipality  members,  loss  of their authority  and termination 
              of their authority  according  to legislation; 
          *   approval  of  
                             in-house  regulations  of municipality; 
          *   elections    of   the   chairman      of   municipality,     his   deputies, permanent and other 
              commissions; 
          *   establishment  of local taxes  and  duties; 
          *   approval  of local budget  and  reports  on its implementation; 
          *   possession  of municipal property, use  and disposal thereof; 
          *   acceptance     and   implementation   of  local   programs of social protection  and   social 
              development; 

          *    acceptance  and implementation  of local programs  of economic  development; 
          *    acceptance  and implementation  of local ecological  programs. 

 II.      Municipalities  may  be  given  additional  authorities  of legislative  and  executive  power.  To 
          implement these  authorities  respective  financing  is required. 

          Implementation        of  such   authorities will be controlled respectively by legislative    and 
          executive  power bodies. 

Article  145.               Decisions  of municipalities 

 I.       Concerning  the  agenda  of the  meetings  of municipality  decisions  shall be taken. 

 11.      Decisions  at the  meetings  of municipality  are taken  by  simple majority  of voting  members  of 
          municipality. 

 III.     Decisions  related  to  local  taxes  and  duties  are  taken  by  majority  of two  thirds of votes of 
          municipality  members. 

Article  146.                Guarantees for Independence  of Municipalities 

 I.       Municipalities  are  independent  to  exercise  their  power;  nevertheless it does not exclude  their 
responsibility  before  the  citizens residing  in the territory  of the  municipality.  Regulations  and  order for 
 selection  of the  municipality  members,  termination  of their  power,  and regulation  for  early  dissolution 
 of municipalities  shall  be  set  forth by  law. 

 II.      Independent  execution  by  the  municipalities  of their  powers  may  not  damage  the  sovereignty 
 of the Azerbaijani  state. 

 III.    The  state  oversees the  activities of municipalities. 

 IV.     Municipalities   submit reports  to  the  Milli  Majlis  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan in cases and in 
the manner prescribed by  law. 

V.       Municipalities      shall  be    ensured   protection   by   the   court, and ensured reimbursement of 
 additional  expenses  caused  by decisions  of the  state bodies. 

                                                        Section  5 
                                             The  right and the  law 

 CHAPTER  10.               Legislative  system 

Article  147.               Legalforce  of Constitution of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  possesses  highest legal power. 

 II.      Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan Republic  possesses  direct legal power. 

 III.     Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  the  basis  of legislative  system  of the  Azerbaijan 


Article  148.                Acts  constituting legislative  system  of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Legislative  system consists  of the  following normative-legal  acts: 
           *   Constitution; 
           *   acts  accepted  by  referendum; 
           *   laws; 
           *   orders; 
           *   decrees  of Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Azerbaijan Republic; 
               normative  acts  of central  executive  power  bodies. 

 II.      International  agreements  wherein  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  one  of the  parties  constitute  an 
          integral  part  of legislative  system of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 III.     In  Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  Constitution  and  laws  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous 
          Republic,  decrees  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic  also 
          possess  legal power. 

 IV.      Legislative   system  of Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic   should  conform  to   legislative 
          system of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 V.       Within  the  limits  of their  authority  local  bodies  of  executive  power  may  accept  normative 
          acts  not contradicting  acts constituting  the  legislative  system. 

Article  149.                Normative  Legal Acts 

 I.      Normative  legal  acts must be based on law and justice  (equal benefit,  equal  attitude). 

 II.      Application  and  implementation  of acts  adopted  by referendum  shall  be  mandatory  for  citizens, 
 legislative,  executive bodies  and judiciary,  legal entities and municipalities  only upon their  publication. 

 III.    Laws  must  not  contradict  the  Constitution.  Application  and  implementation  of only  published 
 laws  shall  be  mandatory  for  all  citizens,  legislative, executive bodies and judiciary, legal entities and 
municipalities. 

 IV.     Decrees  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  must  not  contradict  Constitution  of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan  and the  laws of the Republic  of Azerbaijan.  Application  and implementation  of 
 only published  laws are mandatory  for all citizens,  executive  authority  bodies,  and  legal entities. 

 V.       Decisions  of the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  must  not  contradict  the 
 Constitution  and  laws  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan,  and  decrees  of the  President  of the  Republic  of 
Azerbaijan.   Application   and   implementation   of  decisions of  the   Cabinet  of  Ministers shall be 
mandatory  for  citizens,  central  and  local  executive   authority  bodies,  legal  entities  only  upon  their 
publication. 

 VI.      Acts  of  the  central   executive   authority  bodies  must  not  contradict  the  Constitution   of the 
 Republic  of Azerbaijan,  laws,  decrees  of the  President  of the  Republic  of Azerbaijan  and  decisions  of 
 the  Cabinet  of Ministers  of the Republic  of Azerbaijan. 

VII.      The  normative  acts  that  improve legal conditions of individuals  and  legal  entities, that lift or 
mitigate the legal  responsibilities  shall have  retroactive  force. Other normative legal acts shall not have 
retroactive  force. 

VIII.     Normative  legal  acts  shall  be  published.  No  one  may  be  forced  to  execute  (to  adhere  to)  a 
regulation  that was  not published  and held  liable  for  failing to  execute  (to adhere  to)  such  regulation. 
An  order  for publication of regulations  shall  be  set  forth by  a Constitutional  law. 

Article  150.               Acts  of municipalities 

 I.       Acts  taken  by  municipalities  should be  based  on  law  and  fairness  (same  attitude  and  equal 
          interests),   should  not  contradict   the   Constitution   and  laws   of  the   Azerbaijan  Republic, 
          decrees  of the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic,  decrees  of Cabinet  of Ministers  of the 
          Azerbaijan  Republic  (in Nakhichevan  Autonomous  Republic-also  to  Constitution  and  laws 
          of Nakhichevan  Autonomous   Republic,   decrees  of  Cabinet  of Ministers   of Nakhichevan 
          Autonomous  Republic). 

 II.      Implementation   of  act  taken  by  the  municipality  is  obligatory   for  citizens  living  on  this 
          territory  and legal entities  located  on this  territory. 

Article  151.               Legal  value  of international acts 

Whenever       there    is  disagreement   between normative-legal acts in   legislative    system   of  the 
Azerbaijan  Republic  (except  Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  acts  accepted  by  way  of 
referendum)  and  international  agreements  wherein  the  Azerbaijan  Republic  is  one  of the  parties, 
provisions  of international  agreements  shall dominate. 

 CHAPTER  XI.               Changes in  Constitution of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

Article  152.               Procedure   of  introduction  of  changes  into   Constitution  of  the 
                            Azerbaijan  Republic. 

 Changes  in  the  text  of the  Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  made  only  by  way  of 
referendum. 

Article  153.               Procedure   of  submit  of proposals on   changes   in   the  text   of 
                             Constitution of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 If proposals  about  changes  in  the  text  of Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  are  presented  by 
 Milli   Majlis   of  the  Azerbaijan Republic or the President of  the  Azerbaijan Republic, then 
 Constitutional  Court of the Azerbaijan  Republic  should give  its conclusion beforehand. 

Article  154.               Limitations  on  authority of Constitutional Court of the Azerbaijan 
                            Republic 

 Constitutional  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  shall  not  take  decisions  concerning  changes  in  the 
text of Constitution  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  made  by  way  of referendum. 

Article  155.               Limitations on initiative on introduction of changes into 
                            Constitution of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 Proposals  about  changes  or abolition  in Articles  1, 2,  6, 7, 8 and  21, about restriction or abolition of 
human  and  citizen's  rights  and  freedoms  envisaged  in  Chapter  III  of the  present  Constitution  or to 
higher  degree than  it  is  specified  in international  treaties Azerbaijan  Republic  is a party  too. 

 CHAPTER  XIL               Amendments   to  the  Constitution of the Azerbaijan  Republic 

Article  156.               Procedure  of introduction  of amendments  to  the  Constitution  of 
                            the Azerbaijan  Republic 

 I.       Amendments   to   the   Constitution   of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   are  taken   in  the   form   of 
          Constitutional  laws  in  Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic,  by  majority  of 95  votes. 

 II.      Constitutional  laws  on amendments  to  Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  are  put to  the 
          vote  in  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  twice.  The  second  voting  shall  be  held  6 
          months  after the  first  one. 

 III.     Constitutional  laws  on  amendments  to  Constitution of the Azerbaijan  Republic  are  submitted 
          to  the  President  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  for  signing  in  an  order  envisaged  in  the  present 
          Constitution  for laws, both  after the  first and after the  second voting. 

 IV.      Constitutional  laws  and  amendments  to  the  Constitution  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  become 
          valid  after  they  have  been  signed  by  the  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   after  the 
          second voting. 

V.        Constitutional   laws   on  amendments   are  integral   part  of  Constitution   of  the  Azerbaijan 
          Republic  and should not contradict  main text of Constitution  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  157.               Initiative  on  introduction  of  amendments  to   Constitution  of the 
                            Azerbaijan  Republic 

Amendments  to  Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  may  be  proposed  by  the  President  of the 
Azerbaijan  Republic  or at least by  63  deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

Article  158.               Limitation        on     initiative on introduction of  additions to the 
                             Constitution ofAzerbaijan  Republic 

 There  cannot  be  proposed  the  introduction  of additions  to  the  Constitution  of Azerbaijan  Republic 
with respect  to provisions  envisaged  in Chapter  I of the present  Constitution. 

                                                       Transitional clauses 

 1.    Constitution  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  comes  into force after it has been accepted by  referendum, 
       from  the   day   of  its  official  publication. Constitution (Main Law) of the Azerbaijan  Republic 
       accepted  on 21  April,  1978  becomes  null  and void  from the  day when the present  Constitution came 
       into  force. 

2.     The  President  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  elected before  the  present Constitution  of the Azerbaijan 
       Republic   came   into   force  shall   carry  out  powers   delegated  to  the President of the Azerbaijan 
       Republic  by  the  present  Constitution. 

3.     Paragraph  5 of Article   101  of the  present  Constitution is  valid for the President of the Azerbaijan 
       Republic  elected  after the  acceptance  of the  present  Constitution. 

4.     Powers  of  people's   deputies  of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   and  Milli   Majlis  formed  by Supreme 
       Council  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  expire  on  a  day  of the  first  meeting  of newly  elected  Milli 
       Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic. 
       The  first  meeting  of newly  elected  Milli  Majlis  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic shall be held a week 
       after  at  least  83  deputies  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan Republic have been elected. The first 
       session  of Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  will  continue  till 31  May,  1996. 
       Article  85  of the  Law  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic "On elections to  Milli Majlis of the Azerbaijan 
       Republic"  accepted  on  15  August,  1995  remains valid till expiration of powers of the first calling of 
       Milli  Majlis  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  elected based  on said law. 

5.     From  the  day  of  acceptance   of the  present  Constitution  Cabinet  of Ministers   of the  Azerbaijan 
       Republic  carries  out powers  delegated  to  it by  the  present  Constitution. 

6.     From the  day when the  present  Constitution  comes  into  force authority  of local Councils of people's 
       deputies  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  are terminated. 
       Authority  delegated  by  legislation  of the  Azerbaijan Republic to local  Councils of people's deputies 
       of the Azerbaijan  Republic  are  carried  out by  local  executive power bodies. 

7.     After  the  present  Constitution  comes  into  force,  the law on local self-government should be taken 
       and elections  to municipalities  must take  place  within  2 years. 

8.     Provisions  of laws  and other normative-legal  acts  acting  on the  territory  of the Azerbaijan Republic 
       before  acceptance  of the  present  Constitution  remain  valid  if they  do  not  contradict the present 
       Constitution. 

9.     Law  courts  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  acting  before  acceptance  of the  present  Constitution  shall 
       carry  out justice  in  accordance  with  authority  and principles specified  in the present Constitution. 

10.    From  the  day  when  the  present  Constitution  comes  into  force,  within one year laws on status of 
       judges, judicial  system and judicial  reform  should be  taken in  line with the present Constitution and 
       judges  of the Azerbaijan  Republic  must be  appointed  anew. 
       Until  said laws  are  taken  appointment  of judges  to their posts and their dismissal will be  done based 
       on legislation  which existed  before  the present  Constitution  came  into  force. 
11.    From  the  day  when  the  present  Constitution  comes  into  force,  within  one  year  the  Law  of the 
       Azerbaijan  Republic   about   Constitutional  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic   shall  be  taken  and 
       Constitutional  Court of the Azerbaijan  Republic  shall be  established.  Until  the  Constitutional Court 
       of  the  Azerbaijan   Republic   is   established  authority of Constitutional Court of  the Azerbaijan 
       Republic  envisaged  by  the  present  Constitution  shall  not  be  implemented.  Question  envisaged  in 
       paragraph  7,  clause  3 of Article  130 of the present Constitution will be solved by Supreme Court of 
       the Azerbaijan  Republic. 

12.  From  the  day  when  the  present  Constitution  comes  into  force  the  Higher  Arbitration  Court  of the 
     Azerbaijan  Republic  is  called  Economical  Court  of the  Azerbaijan  Republic  and  carries  out  powers 
     defined  by  existing  legislation. 

        With modifications  introduced to  the Constitution 
       as a result of Referendum  held on 18 March 2009. 

                       
