
THE BELGIAN CONSTITUTION 

This new translation of the Belgian Constitution was made under the guidance of the legal Department of the House of 
Representatives and with the collaboration of Mr A Maclean. 

The legal Department is also thankful to Mr R. Ryckeboer; Adviser to the President of the Constitutional Court, for his 
suggestions and appraisal. 

JANUARY 2009 

BELGIAN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

This publication contains the text of the Constitution as coordinated on 17 February 1994, including the following 
further revisions: 

(25 April 2007 - BSG* 26 April 2007) (25 April 2007 - BSG 26 April 2007) 

(I I December 1998 - BSG 15 December 1998) (21 February 2002 - BSG 26 February 2002) 

(21 February 2002 - BSG 26 February 2002) 

(2 February 2005 - BSG 17 February 2005) 

(23 March 2000 - BSG 25 May 2000 and 

22 December 2008 - BSG 29 December 2008) (I I March 1997 - BSG 2 April 1997, 

12 March 1999 - BSG 9 April 1999 and 26 March 2005 - BSG 7 April 2005) 

Article 59 (28 February 1997 - BSG I March 1997) 

Article 66 (25 March 1996 - BSG 19 April 1996) 

Article 67, § I (10 June 2004 - BSG II June 2004) 

Article 71 (25 March 1996 - BSG 19 April 1996) 

Article 103 (12 June 1998 - BSG 16 June 1998) 

Heading of Title III, Chapter IV, Section I, Sub-section I 

(9 July 2004 - BSG 13 August 2004) Heading of Title III, Chapter V and its Section II 

(7 May 2007 - BSG 8 May 2007) 

Article I 18bis (25 March 1996 - BSG 19 April 1996) 

Article 125 (17 June 1998 - BSG 18 June 1998) 

Article 130 (20 May 1997 - BSG 21 June 1997) 

Article I 42bis (7 May 2007 - BSG 8 May 2007) 

Article 147 (16 May 2000 - BSG 27 May 2000) 

Article 150 (7 May 1999 - BSG 29 May 1999) 

Article 151 (20 November 1998 - BSG 24 November 1998) 

Article 157 (17 December 2002 - BSG 31 January 2003) 

Article 184 (30 March 200 I - BSG 31 March 200 I ) 

Repealing clauses concerning Tide IX 

(6 December 2005 - BSG 28 December 2005) 

Tide 

Ibis 7bis 8 10 

Article 

Article 

Article Article 

I Ibis 14bis 

Article 

Article 

22bis 

Article 

41 

Modifications to the terminology 

(25 February 2005 - BSG I I March 2005 + Erratum in BSG 18 March 2005) 

*Belgian State Gazette 

Legal Department of the Belgian House of Representatives D/OOOOIOOOOIOO 

CONTENTS 

Title I 

On federal Belgium, its components and its territory 

Title Ibis 

On general political objectives of federal Belgium, the Communities and the Regions 


Title II 

On Belgians and their rights 

Title III 

On powers 14 

Chapter I - On the federal Houses 16 

Section I - On the House of Representatives 20 

Section II - On the Senate 21 

Chapter II - On federal legislative power 24 

Chapter III - On the King and the Federal Government 27 

Section I - On the King 27 

Section II - On the Federal Government 29 

Section III - On responsibilities 31 

Chapter IV - On Communities and Regions 33 

Section I - On bodies 33 

Sub-section /- On Community and Regional Parliaments 33 

Sub-section 1/- On Community and Regional Governments 35 

Section 11- On responsibilities 37 

Sub-section /- On the responsibilities of the Communities 37 

Sub-section 1/- On the competences of the Regions 39 

Sub-section 111- Special provisions 39 

Chapter V - On the Constitutional Court, and the prevention 

and resolution of conflicts 41 

Section I - On the prevention of conflicts of competence 41 

Section II - On the Constitutional Court 41 

Section III - On the prevention and the settlement of 

conflicts of interest 42 

Chapter VI - On judicial power 

42 

Chapter VII- On the Council of State and administrative courts 

48 

Chapter Vlll - On provincial and municipal institutions 

48 

Title IV 

On international relations 

51 

Title V 

On finances 

53 

Title VI 

On the armed forces and the police service 

56 

Title VII 

General provisions 

57 

Title VIII 

On the revision of the Constitution 

58 

Title IX 

The entry into force and transitional provisions 

59 

THE CONSTITUTION 

TITLE I 

ON FEDERAL BELGIUM, ITS COMPONENTS AND ITS TERRITORY 

Article I 

Belgium is a federal State composed of Communities and Regions. 

Article 2 

Belgium comprises three Communities: the Flemish Community, the French Community and the German-speaking Community. 

Article 3 

Belgium comprises three Regions: the Flemish Region, the Walloon Region and the Brussels Region. 

Article 4 

Belgium comprises four linguistic regions: the Dutch-speaking region, the French­ speaking region, the bilingual region of 
Brussels-Capital and the German-speaking region. 

Each municipality of the Kingdom forms part of one of these linguistic regions. The boundaries of the four linguistic 
regions can only be changed or corrected by a law passed by a majority of the votes cast in each linguistic group in each 
House, on condition that a majority of the members of each group is present and provided that the total number of votes 
in favour that are cast in the two linguistic groups is equal to at least two thirds of the votes cast. 

Article 5 

The Flemish Region comprises the following provinces: Antwerp, Flemish Brabant, West Flanders, East Flanders and Limburg. 
The Walloon Region comprises the following provinces: Walloon Brabant, Hainaut, Liege, Luxembourg and Namur. 

A law is required, if it is found necessary, to further divide the territory to create more provinces. 

A law can exclude certain territories, of which it establishes the boundaries, from division into provinces, bring them 
directly under the federal executive power and subject them to a specific statute. This law must be passed by a majority 
as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

Article 6 

Provincial subdivisions can only be established by virtue of a law. 

Article 7 

The boundaries of the State, the provinces and the municipalities can only be changed or corrected by virtue of a law. 

TITLE ISIs 

ON GENERAL POLITICAL OBJECTIVES OF FEDERAL BELGIUM, THE COMMUNITIES AND THE REGIONS 

Article 7bis 

In the exercise of their respective competences, the Federal State, the Communities and the Regions follow the objectives 
of lasting development in its social, economic and environmental aspects, taking into account the solidarity between the 
generations. 

TITLE II 

ON BELGIANS AND THEIR RIGHTS 

Article 8 

The status as a Belgian citizen is acquired, kept and lost according to rules established by civil law. 

The Constitution and the other laws concerning political rights,establish,apart from this status, the necessary conditions 
for the exercising of these rights. 

In a departure from the second paragraph, the law can, in accordance with Belgium's international and supranational 
obligations, establish a right to vote for citizens of the European Union who are not Belgian citizens. 

The right to vote referred to in the preceding paragraph can be extended by a law to Belgian residents who are not 
citizens of a Member State of the European Union, under the conditions and in accordance with the terms specified in such 
a law. 

Transitional provision 

The law referred to in the fourth paragraph cannot be passed before I January 2001. 

Article 9 

Naturalisation is granted by the federal legislative power. 

Article 10 

No class distinctions exist in the State. 

Belgians are equal before the law; they alone are eligible for civil and military service, but for the exceptions that 
can be created by a law for particular cases. 

Equality between women and men is guaranteed. 

Article II 

Enjoyment of the rights and freedoms recognised for Belgians must be provided without discrimination. To this end, laws 
and federate laws* guarantee among others the rights and freedoms of ideological and philosophical minorities. 

* In the whole text of the Constitution,"law"refers to a legislative act adopted by the federal legislative assemblies 
(House of Representatives and Senate) and "federate law" refers to a legislative act adopted by the legislative assemblies 
of the Regions and Communities (Flemish Parliament, Parliament of the French Community, Parliament of the German-speaking 
Community and Parliament of the Walloon Region). 

Article I Ibis 

The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 guarantees that women and men may equally exercise their rights 
and freedoms, and in particular promotes their equal access to elective and public mandates. 

The Council of Ministers and the Governments of the Communities and the Regions include both women and men. 

The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article I 34 provides for women and men to sit on the permanent deputations 
of the provincial councils, the colleges of the burgomasters and aldermen, the councils and permanent committees of the 
social welfare centres and on the executives of any other inter-provincial, inter-municipal or intra-municipal territorial 
body. 

The preceding paragraph does not apply when the law, federate law or rule referred to in Article I 34 provides for the 
direct election of the members of the permanent deputations of the provincial councils, of aldermen, of the members of the 
councils and permanent committees of the social welfare centres or of the members of the executives of any other 
inter-provincial, inter-municipal or intra-municipal territorial body. 

Article 12 

The freedom of the individual is guaranteed. 

No one can be prosecuted except in the cases provided for by the law, and in the form prescribed by the law. 

Except in the case of a flagrant offence, no one can be arrested except on the strength of a reasoned judge's order, which 
must be served at the time of arrest or at the latest within twenty-four hours. 

Article 13 

No one can be separated, against his will, from the judge that the law has assigned to him. 

Article 14 

No punishment can be introduced or administered except by virtue of the law. 

Article 14bis 

Capital punishment is abolished. 

Article 15 

One's home is inviolable; no house search may take place except in the cases provided for by the law and in the form 
prescribed by the law. 

Article 16 

No one can be deprived of his property except in the case of expropriation for a public purpose, in the cases and manner 
established by the law and in return for fair compensation paid beforehand. 

Article 17 

Assets may not be confiscated as a means of punishment. 

Article 18 

Civil death is abolished; it cannot be re-introduced. 

Article 19 

Freedom of worship, its public practice and freedom to demonstrate one's opinions on all matters are guaranteed, but 
offences committed when this freedom is used may be punished. 

Article 20 

No one can be obliged to contribute in any way whatsoever to the acts and ceremonies of a religion or to observe its days 
of rest. 

Article 21 

The State does not have the right to intervene either in the appointment or in the installation of ministers of any 
religion whatsoever or to forbid these ministers from corresponding with their superiors, from publishing the acts of 
these superiors, but, in this latter case, normal responsibilities as regards the press and publishing apply. 

A civil wedding should always precede the blessing of the marriage, apart from the exceptions to be established by the 
law if needed. 

Article 22 

Everyone has the right to the respect of his private and family life, except in the cases and conditions determined by 
the law. 

The laws, federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134 guarantee the protection of this right. 

Article 22bis 

Each child is entitled to have his or her moral, physical, mental and sexual integrity respected. 

Each child has the right to express his or her views in all matters affecting him or her, the views of the child being 
given due weight in accordance with his or her age and maturity. 

Each child has the right to benefit from measures and facilities which promote his or her development. 

In all decisions concerning children, the interest of the child is a primary consideration. 

The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 ensures these rights of the child. 

Article 23 

Everyone has the right to lead a life in keeping with human dignity. 

To this end, the laws, federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134 guarantee economic, social and cultural rights, 
taking into account corresponding obligations, and determine the conditions for exercising them. 

These rights include among others: 

I o the right to employment and to the free choice of an occupation within the context of a general employment policy, 
aimed among others at ensuring a level of employment that is as stable and high as possible, the right to fair terms of 
employment and to fair remuneration, as well as the right to information, consultation and collective negotiation; 

T' the right to social security, to health care and to social, medical and legal aid; 3° the right to decent 
accommodation; 

4° the right to the protection of a healthy environment; 5° the right to cultural and social fulfilment. 

Article 24 

§ I. Education is free; any preventive measure is forbidden; the punishment of offences is regulated only by the law or 
federate law. 

The community offers free choice to parents. 

The community organises non-denominational education. This implies in particular the respect of the philosophical, 
ideological or religious beliefs of parents and pupils. 

Schools run by the public authorities offer, until the end of compulsory education, the choice between the teaching of 
one of the recognised religions and non-denominational ethics teaching. 

§ 2.lf a community, in its capacity as an organising authority, wishes to delegate powers to one or several autonomous 
bodies, it can only do so by federate law adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, 

§ 3. Everyone has the right to education with the respect of fundamental rights and freedoms. Access to education is free 
until the end of compulsory education. 

All pupils of school age have the right to moral or religious education at the community's expense. 

§ 4. All pupils or students, parents, teaching staff or institutions are equal before the law or federate law. The law 
and federate law take into account objective differences, in particular the characteristics of each organising authority 
that warrant appropriate treatment. 

§ 5. The organisation, the recognition and the subsidising of education by the community are regulated by the law or 
federate law. 

Article 25 

The press is free; censorship can never be introduced; no security can be demanded from authors, publishers or printers. 

When the author is known and resident in Belgium, neither the publisher, the printer nor the distributor can be prosecuted. 

Article 26 

Belgians have the right to gather peaceably and without arms, in accordance with the laws that can regulate the exercise 
of this right, without submitting it to prior authorisation. 

This provision does not apply to open air meetings, which are entirely subject to police regulations. 

Article 27 

Belgians have the right to enter into association or partnership; this right cannot be subject to any preventative measure. 

Article 28 

Everyone has the right to address petitions signed by one or more persons to the public authorities. 

Constituted bodies are alone entitled to address petitions under a collective name. 

Article 29 The confidentiality of letters is inviolable. 

The law determines which officials may violate the confidentiality of letters entrusted to the postal service. 

Article 30 

The use of languages spoken in Belgium is optional; only the law can rule on this matter, and only for acts of the public 
authorities and for judicial affairs. 

Article 31 

No authorisation is necessary prior to taking legal action against civil servants for offences resulting from their 
administration, except with regard to what has been ruled on concerning ministers and members of the Community and 
Regional Governments. 

Article 32 

Everyone has the right to consult any administrative document and to obtain a copy, except in the cases and conditions 
stipulated by the laws, federate laws or rules referred to in Article I 34. 

TITLE III 

ON POWERS 

Article 33 

All powers emanate from the Nation. 

These powers are exercised in the manner laid down by the Constitution. 

Article 34 

The exercising of specific powers can be assigned by a treaty or by a law to institutions of public international law. 

Article 35 

The federal authority only has competences in the matters that are formally assigned to it by the Constitution and the 
laws passed by virtue of the Constitution itself. 

The Communities and the Regions,each in its own field of concern, have competences for the other matters, under the 
conditions and in the terms stipulated by the law.This law must be adopted by a majority as described Article 4, last 
paragraph. 

Transitional provision 

The law referred to in the second paragraph determines the date on which this article comes into force. This date cannot 
precede the date of the entry into force of the new article to be inserted in Title III of the Constitution, which 
determines the competences exclusive to the federal authority. 

Article 36 

The federal legislative power is exercised jointly by the King, the House of Representatives and the Senate. 

Article 37 

The federal executive power, as regulated by the Constitution, belongs to the King. 

Article 38 

Each Community has those powers which are recognised by the Constitution or by the laws passed by virtue of the 
Constitution. 

Article 39 

The law assigns to the regional bodies that it creates and that are composed of elected representatives the power to 
manage the matters that it determines, with the exception of those referred to in Articles 30 and 127 to 129, within the 
scope and according to the manner laid down by a law. This law must be passed by a majority as described in Article 4, 
last paragraph. 

Article 40 

Judiciary power is exercised by the courts. 

Court decisions are executed in the name of the King. 

Article 41 

Interests which are exclusively of a municipal or provincial nature are ruled on by municipal or provincial councils, 
according to the principles laid down by the Constitution. 

The rule referred to in Article 134 defines the competences, working rules and mode of election of intra-municipal 
territorial bodies that are authorised to regulate matters of municipal interest. 

These intra-municipal territorial bodies are created in municipalities with more than 100,000 inhabitants following the 
initiative of the municipal council. Their members are directly elected. In implementation of a law adopted by a majority 
as described in Article 4, last paragraph, the federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 regulates the other 
conditions and the way in which such intra-municipal territorial bodies may be created. 

This federate law and the rule referred to in Article 134 can only be adopted by a majority of two thirds of the votes 
cast, under the condition that the majority of the members of the Parliament concerned is present. 

Matters of municipal or provincial interest can be the subject of a referendum in the municipality or province concerned. 
The rule referred to in Article 134 regulates the procedures and arrangements for the referendum. 

CHAPTER I 

ON THE FEDERAL HOUSES 

Article 42 

The members of the two Houses represent the Nation, and not only those who elected them. 

Article 43 

§ I. For cases determined by the Constitution, the elected members of each House are divided into a Dutch linguistic group 
and a French linguistic group, in the manner determined by the law. 

§ 2. The senators referred to in Article 67, § I, 10, 3° and 60 make up the Dutch linguistic group of the Senate. The 
senators referred to in Article 67, § I, T', 4° and r make up the French linguistic group of the Senate. 

Article 44 

The Houses meet by right each year on the second Tuesday of October, unless they 

have been convened prior to this by the King. 

The Houses must meet for at least forty days each year. The King pronounces the closing of the session. 

The King has the right to convene the Houses to an extraordinary meeting. 

Article 45 

The King can adjourn the Houses. However, the adjournment cannot be for longer than one month, nor can it be repeated in 
the same session without the consent of the Houses. 

Article 46 

The King has the right to dissolve the House of Representatives only if the latter, with the absolute majority of its 
members: 

I 0 either rejects a motion of confidence in the Federal Government and does not propose to the King, within three days 
of the day of the rejection of the motion, the appointment of a successor to the prime minister; 

T' or adopts a motion of no confidence with regard to the Federal Government and does not simultaneously propose to the 
King the appointment of a successor to the prime minister; 

The motions of confidence and no confidence can only be voted on forty-eight hours after the tabling of the motion. 

Moreover; the King may, in the event of the resignation of the Federal Government, dissolve the House of Representatives 
after having received its agreement expressed by the absolute majority of its members. 

The dissolution of the House of Representatives entails the dissolution of the Senate. 

The act of dissolution convenes the electorate within forty days and the Houses within two months. 

Article 47 

The sittings of the Houses are public. 

Nevertheless, each House can meet in camera at the request of its president or of ten members. 

It decides afterwards, by absolute majority, whether the sitting must be continued in public on the same subject. 

Article 48 

Each House verifies the credentials of its members and judges any dispute that can be raised on this matter. 

Article 49 

One cannot be a member of both Houses at the same time. 

Article 50 

Any member of either House appointed by the King as minister and who accepts this appointment ceases to sit in Parliament and takes up his mandate again when the King has terminated his office as minister. The law determines the rules for his replacement in the House concerned. 

Article 51 

Any member of either House appointed by the Federal Government to any salaried position other than that of minister and 
who accepts the appointment immediately ceases to sit in Parliament and only takes his seat again after having been 
re-elected. 

Article 52 

Each session, each House appoints its president, its Vice-presidents, and forms its bureau. 

Article 53 

All resolutions are passed by an absolute majority of the votes cast, except for what is established by the rules of 
procedure of the Houses with regard to elections and nominations. 

If the vote is tied, the proposal submitted for discussion is rejected. 

Neither of the two Houses can pass a resolution unless a majority of its members is present. 

Article 54 

Except for budgets and laws requiring a special majority, a reasoned motion Signed by at least three-quarters of the 
members of one of the linguistic groups and tabled following the depositing of the report and prior to the final vote in 
a public sitting can declare that the provisions that it designates of a Government bill or private member's bill can 
gravely damage relations between the Communities. 

In this case, Parliamentary procedure is suspended and the motion is referred to the Council of Ministers, which within 
thirty days gives its reasoned opinion on the motion and invites the House involved to pronounce on this opinion or on 
the Government bill or private member's bill that, if need be, has been amended. 

This procedure can be applied only once by the members of a linguistic group with regard to the same Government bill or 
private member's bill. 

Article 55 

Votes are cast by sitting and standing or by call-over; on the laws as a whole is always voted by call-over. The election 
and nomination of candidates are carried out by secret ballot. 

Article 56 Each House has the right to hold an enquiry. 

Article 57 

It is forbidden to present petitions to the Houses in person. 

Each House has the right to send to ministers petitions that are addressed to it.The ministers are obliged to explain the 
content of these petitions whenever the House so requires. 

Article 58 

No member of either House can be prosecuted or be the subject of any investigation with regard to opinions expressed and 
votes cast by him in the exercise of his duties. 

Article 59 

Except in the case of a flagrant offence, no member of either House may, during a session and in criminal matters, be 
directly referred or summoned before a court or be arrested, except with the authorisation of the House of which he is a 
member. 

Except in the case of a flagrant offence, coercive measures requiring the intervention of a judge cannot, during a 
session and in criminal matters, be instituted against a member of either House, except by the first President of the 
appeal court at the request of the competent judge. This decision is to be communicated to the President of the House 
concerned. 

All searches or seizures executed by virtue of the preceding paragraph can be performed only in the presence of the 
President of the House concerned or a member appointed by him. 

During the session, only the officers of the public prosecutor's office and competent officers may institute criminal 
proceedings against a member of either House. 

The member concerned of either House may at any stage of the judicial enquiry request during a session and in criminal 
matters that the House of which he is a member suspend proceedings. To grant this request, the House concerned must 
decide by a majority of two thirds of the votes cast. 

Detention of a member of either House or his prosecution before a court is suspended during the session if the House of 
which he is a member so requests. 

Article 60 

Each House determines, in its rules of procedure, the way in which it exercises its duties. 

SECTION I 

ON THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

Article 61 

The members of the House of Representatives are elected directly by citizens who are at least eighteen years of age and 
who do not fall within the categories of exclusion stipulated by the law. 

Each elector has the right to only one vote. 

Article 62 

The composition of the electoral colleges is regulated by the law. 

Elections take place in accordance with the system of proportional representation that the law determines. 

Voting is obligatory and secret. It takes place in the municipality, except in the cases determined by the law. 

Article 63 

§ I. The House of Representatives is composed of one hundred and fifty members. 

§ 2.The number of seats in each electoral district corresponds to the result of dividing the number of inhabitants of the 
electoral district by the federal divisor; which is obtained by dividing the number of the population of the Kingdom by 
one hundred and fifty. 

The remaining seats are assigned to the electoral districts with the greatest surplus of population not yet represented. 

§ 3. The distribution of the members of the House of Representatives among the electoral districts is determined by the 
King in proportion to the population. 

The number of inhabitants in each electoral district is established every ten years by a census or by any other means 
defined by the law. The King publishes the results within six months. 

Within three months of this publication, the King determines the number of seats to be assigned to each electoral district. 

The new distribution is applied as of the following general election. 

§ 4. The law determines the electoral districts; it also determines the conditions required to be an elector as well as 
the way in which elections are conducted. 

Artide 64 

To be eligible, one must: 

I c be Belgian; 

2'" enjoy civil and political rights; 

3'" have reached the age of twenty-one; 4" be resident in Belgium. 

No other condition of eligibility can be required. 

Artide 65 

The members of the House of Representatives are elected for four years. The House is re-elected every four years. 

Article 66 

Each member of the House of Representatives has an annual indemnity of twelve thousand francs. 

Within the national borders, the members of the House of Representatives have the right to free travel on all means of 
transport operated or conceded by the public authorities. 

The President of the House of Representatives can be granted an annual indemnity to be charged to the allowance that 
covers the expenses of this assembly. 

The House determines the amount that can be deducted from the indemnity to form a contribution to retirement and pension 
funds that it considers necessary to set up. 

SECTION II 

ON THE SENATE 

Artide 67 

§ I.Without prejudice toArticle 72, the Senate is composed of seventy-one senators, of whom: 

I " twenty-five senators elected in accordance with Article 61 by the Dutch electoral college; 

2'" fifteen senators elected in accordance with Article 61 by the French electoral college; 

3" ten senators appointed from within its members by the Parliament of the flemish Community, called the Flemish 
Parliament; 

4° ten senators appointed from within its members by the Parliament of the French Community; 

5° one senator appointed from within its members by the Parliament of the German- 

speaking Community. 

6° six senators appointed by the senators referred to in 10 and 30; r four senators appointed by the senators referred to 
in rand 4°. 

When their Parliament is re-elected as a whole and this re-election does not coincide with the renewal of the Senate, the 
senators referred to in the first paragraph, 3° to 5°, who no longer have a seat in their Parliament retain the mandate 
of senator until the opening of the first session following the re-election of their Parliament. 

§ 2. At least one of the senators referred to in § I, I 0, 3 o and 60 is to be legally resident in the bilingual region 
of Brussels-Capital on the day of his election. 

At least six of the senators referred to in § I, r, 4° and T" are to be legally resident in the bilingual region of 
Brussels-Capital on the day of their election. If at least four of the senators referred to in § I, T' are not legally 
resident in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of their election, at least two of the senators referred 
to in § 1,4° must be legally resident in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of their election. 

Article 68 

§ I. The total number of senators referred to in Article 67,§ I, I o,r, 3°,4°,6° and r is divided, according to the system 
of proportional representation that the law determines, among each linguistic group on the basis of the vote count of the 
lists obtained at the election ofthe senators referred to in Article 67, § I, I o and T', 

For the appointment of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1,3° and 4°, only those lists are taken into 
consideration on which at least one senator referred to in Article 67, § I, 10 and T' is elected and provided that a 
sufficient number of members elected on this list sit,according to the case, in the Parliament of the Flemish Community or
the Parliament of the French Community. 

For the appointment of the senators referred to in Article 67, § I, 6 c and T", only those lists are taken into 
consideration on which at least one senator referred to in Article 67, § I, I o and T' is elected. 

§ 2. For the election of the senators referred to in Article 67, § I, I o and T', voting is obligatory and secret. Voting 
takes place in the municipality, except in the cases that the law determines. 

§ 3. For the election of senators referred to in Article 67, § I, I c and T', the law determines the electoral districts 
and the composition of the electoral colleges; it also determines the conditions which must be met in order to be an 
elector, as well as the way in which elections are conducted. 

The law determines the rules for the appointment of the senators referred to in Article 67, § I, 3° to 5°, with the 
exception of the detailed rules stipulated by a law adopted by the majority provided in Article 4, last paragraph, which 
are determined by federate law by the Community Parliaments, each one for matters of its concern. This federate law must 
be adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, on condition that the majority of the members of the Parliament 
concerned is present. 

The senator referred to in Article 67, § 1,50 is appointed by the Parliament of the German-speaking Community by absolute 
majority of the votes cast. 

The law determines the rules for the appointment of the senators referred to in Article 67,§ 1,6°and T', 

Article 69 

In order to be elected or appointed as a senator, one must lObe Belgian; 

T' enjoy civil and political rights; 

3° have reached the age of twenty-one; 4° be resident in Belgium. 

Article 70 

The senators referred to in Article 67, § I, I o and T' are elected forfour years. The senators referred to in Article 67, 
§ 1,6° and r are appointed for four years.The Senate is renewed as a whole every four years. 

The election of the senators referred to in Article 67, § I, 10 and T' is held at the same time as the election for the 
House of Representatives. 

Article 71 

Senators do not receive a salary. 

They do, however; have the right to be compensated for expenses; this compensation is fixed at four thousand francs a year. 

Within the national borders, the members of the Senate have the right to free travel on all means of transport operated or 
conceded by the public authorities. 

Article 72 

The King's children or, in the absence of children, the Belgian descendants of the branch of the royal family called on to 
reign are senators by right at the age of eighteen. They are not entitled to take part in votes until the age of 
twenty-one. They are not taken into account to establish whether a quorum is present. 

Article 73 

Any assembly of the Senate that is held when the House of Representatives is not in session is null and void. 

CHAPTER II 

ON FEDERAL LEGISLATIVE POWER 

Article 74 

As a departure from Article 36, federal legislative power is jointly exercised by the 

King and by the House of Representatives for: 

I c the granting of naturahsanon; 

r laws relating to the civil and criminal liability of the King's ministers; 

3" State budgets and accounts, without prejudice to Article 174, first paragraph, second sentence; 

4" the setting of army quotas. 

Article 75 

Each branch of the federal legislative power has the right to propose legislation. Except for those matters described in 
Article 77, draft bills submitted to the Houses following the King's initiative are tabled with the House of 
Representatives and are then sent to the Senate. 

Draft bills relating to the approval of treaties submitted to the Houses following the King's initiative are tabled with 
the Senate and then sent to the House of Representatives. 

Article 76 

A draft bill may be adopted by a House only after having been voted on article by article. 

The Houses have the right to amend and to split the articles and amendments proposed. 

Article 77 

The House of Representatives and the Senate are equally competent with respect 

to: 

I" declaring that there are reasons to revise such constitutional provision as they determine, and with respect to such 
constitutional revision; 

24 

T' matters that must be settled by both legislative Houses by virtue of the Constitution; 

3° the laws described in Articles 5,39,43,50,68,71,77,82, 115, 117, 118, 121, 123, 127 to 131, 135 to 137, 140 to 143, 
145, 146, 163, 165, 166, 167, § I, third paragraph, § 4 and § 5, 169, 170, § 2, second paragraph, § 3, second and third 
paragraphs, § 4, second paragraph, and 175 to 177, as well as the laws enacted in order to execute the above­ mentioned 
laws and articles; 

4° the laws to be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, as 

well as the laws enacted in order to execute such laws; 5° the laws referred to in Article 34; 

6 o the laws approving treaties; 

T" the laws adopted in accordance with Article 169, to guarantee that international 

or supranational commitments are observed; 8° the laws relating to the Council of State; 9° the organisation of the courts; 

10° the laws approving cooperation agreements between the State, the Communities and the Regions. 

A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph may designate other laws for which the House of 
Representatives and the Senate are equally competent. 

Article 78 

In other matters than those described in Articles 74 and 77, draft bills adopted by the House of Representatives are sent 
to the Senate. 

At the request of at least fifteen senators, the Senate examines the draft bills. This 

request is made within fifteen days of the draft bill being received. 

The Senate may, within no more than sixty days: - decide not to amend the draft bill; 

- adopt the bill after having amended it. 

If the Senate does not pronounce on the bill within the time allotted, or if the Senate has informed the House of 
Representatives of its decision not to amend, the bill is sent by the House of Representatives to the King. 

If the bill has been amended, the Senate sends it to the House of Representatives, which makes a final decision by either 
adopting or rejecting all or some of the amendments adopted by the Senate. 

Article 79 

If, during the course of an examination as described in Article 78, last paragraph, the House of Representatives adopts a 
new amendment, the draft bill is returned to the Senate, which pronounces on the amended draft bill. The Senate may, 
within no more than fifteen days: 

- decide to accept the bill as amended by the House of Representatives; 

- adopt the draft bill following further amendment. 

If the Senate does not pronounce within the allotted time, or if it informs the House of Representatives of its decision 
to accept the draft bill as voted by the House of Representatives, the latter then sends the bill to the King. 

If the draft bill is further amended, the Senate sends it to the House of Representatives, which then makes a final 
decision by either adopting or amending it. 

Article 80 

If, when a draft bill as described in Article 78 is tabled, the Federal Government requests urgency, the Parliamentary 
consultation committee described in Article 82 sets the time limits by which the Senate should make its decision. 

If the committee fails to reach agreement, the time limit allotted to the Senate to evoke the bill is reduced to seven 
days, and the time limit set in Article 78, third paragraph for the examination of the bill is reduced to thirty days. 

Article 81 

If the Senate, by virtue of its right to propose legislation, adopts a draft private member's bill concerning the matters 
described in Article 78, this draft bill is then sent to the House of Representatives. 

Within no more than sixty days, the House must give its final decision, either by rejecting or by adopting the draft bill. 

If the House amends the draft bill, it is then returned to the Senate, which deliberates in accordance with the rules 
laid down in Article 79. 

In the case of the application of Article 79, third paragraph, the House makes a final decision within fifteen days. 

If the House fails to make a decision within the time limits set in the second and fourth paragraphs, the Parliamentary 
consultation committee described in Article 82 meets within fifteen days and sets the time limit within which the House 
will have to make a decision. 

If the committee fails to reach agreement, the House makes a decision within sixty days. 

Article 82 

A Parliamentary consultation committee composed equally of members of the House of Representatives and of the Senate 
settles conflicts of competence that arise between the two Houses and may, by mutual agreement, extend the examination 
deadlines set in Articles 78 to 81 at any time. 

If no majority exists in the two groups composing the committee, the latter makes its decision by a majority of two thirds 
of its members. 

A law determines the composition and functioning of the committee, as well as the way of calculating the time limits set 
in Arndes 78 to 81. 

Article 83 

Each private member's bill and each Government bill mentions whether it concerns a matter described in Article 74, Article 
77 or Artide 78. 

Article 84 

Only the law can give an authoritative interpretation of laws. 

CHAPTER III 

ON THE KING AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 

SECTION I 

ON THE KING 

Article 85 

The constitutional powers of the King are hereditary through the direct, natural and legitimate descent from H.M. Leopold, 
George, Christian, Frederick of Saxe-Coburg, by order of primogeniture. 

The descendant mentioned in the first paragraph who marries without the King's consent or, in his absence, without the 
consent of those exercising the King's powers in cases provided for by the Constitution shall be deprived of his right to 
the crown. 

Nonetheless, this right may be restored by the King or, in his absence, by those exercising the powers of the King in 
cases provided for by the Constitution, but only with the assent of both Houses. 

Article 86 

For lack of a descendant of H.M. Leopold, George, Christian, Frederick of Saxe­ Coburg, the King may appoint his successor, 
with the assent of the Houses, in the manner described in Article 87. 

In the absence of an appointment made in the manner described above, the throne is considered vacant. 

Article 87 

The King may not at the same time act as head of another State without the consent of both Houses. 

Neither House may deliberate on this matter unless two thirds of its members are present, and the resolution is only 
adopted if it attracts at least two thirds of the votes. 

Article 88 

The King's person is inviolable; his ministers are accountable. 

Article 89 

The law determines the civil list for the duration of each reign. 

Article 90 

Upon the death of the King, the Houses meet without being convened at the latest on the tenth day after his death. If the 
Houses have been dissolved previously, and if the act of dissolution convenes them to meet later than the tenth day 
following the King's death, the members of the former Houses take up their seats again until the meeting of those who 
will replace them. 

From the death of the King until the oath is sworn by his successor to the throne or by the Regent, the King's 
constitutional powers are exercised, in the name of the Belgian people, by the ministers meeting in council, and under 
their responsibility. 

Article 91 

The King attains his majority upon his eighteenth birthday. 

The King only accedes to the throne after having sworn the following oath before the united Houses: 

"I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Belgian people, to preserve the country's national independence 
and its territorial integrity". 

Article 92 

If upon the death of the King, his successor is a minor, the two Houses meet as a Single assembly to appoint a Regent and 
a Guardian. 

Article 93 

If the King finds himself unable to reign, the ministers, having had this inability stated, immediately convene the Houses. 
The Regent and Guardian are appointed by the joint Houses. 

Article 94 

Only one person may be Regent. 

The Regent takes up office only after having sworn the oath as prescribed in Article 91. 

Article 95 

If the throne is vacant, the Houses, deliberating as one assembly, provisionally appoint a Regent, until the convening of 
the fully renewed Houses; this meeting must take place within two months.The new Houses, deliberating as one assembly, 
fill the vacancy. 

SECTION II 

ON THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 

Article 96 

The King appoints and dismisses his ministers. 

The Federal Government offers its resignation to the King if the House of Representatives, by an absolute majority of its 
members, adopts a motion of no­ confidence proposing a successor to the prime minister for appointment by the King or 
proposes a successor to the prime minister for appointment by the King within three days of the rejection of a motion of 
confidence. The King appoints the proposed successor as prime minister, who takes office when the new Federal Government 
is sworn in. 

Article 97 

Only Belgians may be ministers. 

Article 98 

No member of the royal family may be a minister. 

Article 99 

The Council of Ministers is composed of no more than fifteen members. 

With the possible exception of the prime minister, the Council of Ministers is composed of an equal number of 
Dutch-speaking members and French-speaking members. 

Article 100 

Ministers have access to both Houses and must be heard whenever they so request. 

The House of Representatives may require the presence of ministers. The Senate may require their presence for discussion 
of a Government bill or private member's bill as mentioned in Article 77 or a Government bill as mentioned in Article 78 
or for the exercise of its right of inquiry as mentioned in Article 56. For other matters, the Senate may request their 
presence. 

Article 101 

Ministers are accountable to the House of Representatives. 

No minister can be prosecuted or be the subject of any investigation with regard to opinions expressed by him in the 
exercise of his duties. 

Article 102 

In no circumstances maya written or oral order of the King exempt a minister from his accountability. 

Article 103 

Ministers are tried exclusively by the appeal court for offences they have allegedly committed in the exercise of their 
duties. The same rule applies in the case of offences allegedly committed by ministers outside the exercise of their 
duties and for which they are tried during the exercise of their duties. As the case may be, Articles 59 and 120 are not 
applicable. 

The law determines the manner of proceeding against them, both when they are prosecuted and when they are tried. 

The law designates the appeal court having jurisdiction, which sits in bane, and specifies its composition. The judgments 
of the appeal court can be appealed to the united chambers of the Supreme Court, which does not pronounce on the merits of 
the case. 

Only the pUblic prosecutor to the appeal court that has jurisdiction may institute and lead criminal proceedings against a 
minister. 

Authorisation by the House of Representatives is required for any public prosecutor's request to refer the minister 
concerned to a particular court or to discharge him, for his direct summons before the appeal court and, except in a case 
of a flagrant offence, for his arrest. 

The law determines the procedure to be followed when Articles 103 and 125 are both applicable. 

A pardon may be granted to a minister convicted in accordance with the first paragraph only upon request by the House of 
Representatives. 

The law determines in which cases and in accordance with which rules injured parties may institute a civil action. 

Transitional provision 

The present article is not applicable to acts which have been the subject of a preliminary judicial investigation or to 
proceedings instituted prior to the entry into force of the law implementing the article. 

In such a case, the follOWing rule applies: the House of Representatives has the right to indict ministers and to bring 
them before the Supreme Court. Only the united chambers of this court have jurisdiction to try ministers in cases covered 
by the criminal laws and by application of the penalties prescribed by such laws. The Law of I 7 December 1996 concerning 
the temporary and partial implementation of Article 103 of the Constitution remains applicable in such cases. 

Article 104 

The King appoints and dismisses the federal secretaries of State. 

These are members of the Federal Government. They do not form part of the Council of Ministers. They are deputies to a 
minister. 

The King determines their duties and the limits within which they may receive the right to countersign. 

Constitutional provisions that apply to ministers apply equally to federal secretaries of State, with the exception of 
Articles 90, second paragraph, 93 and 99. 

SECTION III 

ON RESPONSIBIUTIES 

Article 105 

The King has no powers other than those formally attributed to him by the Constitution and by spedfic laws passed by 
virtue of the Constitution itself. 

Article 106 

No act of the King can take effect without the countersignature of a minister, who, in doing so, assumes responsibility 
for it. 

Article 107 

The King bestows ranks within the army. 

He appoints civil servants to positions in the general and foreign affairs administrations of the State, but for those 
exceptions created by the laws. 

He makes appointments to other positions only by virtue of specific legal provisions. 

Article 108 

The King makes decrees and regulations required for the execution of laws, without ever having the power either to 
suspend the laws themselves or to grant dispensation from their execution. 

Article 109 

The King sanctions and promulgates laws. 

Article 110 

The King has the right to remit or to reduce sentences passed by judges, except with regard to what has been ruled on 
concerning ministers and members of the Community and Regional Governments. 

Article III 

The King may not pardon a minister or a member of a Community or Regional Government convicted by the Supreme Court, 
except at the request of the House of Representatives or of the Parliament concerned. 

Article 112 

The King may mint money, in execution of the law. 

Article 113 

The King may confer titles of nobility, without ever having the power to attach privileges to them. 

Article 114 

The King grants military orders, with consideration of the rules laid down by the law. 

CHAPTER IV 

ON COMMUNITIES AND REGIONS 

SECTION I 

ON BODIES 

SUs.-SECTION I 

ON COMMUNITY AND REGIONAL PARUAMENTS 

Article 115 

§ I. There is a Parliament of the flemish Community, called the flemish Parliament, and a Parliament of the french 
Community, the composition and functioning of whkh are determined by a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4. 
last paragraph. 

There is a Parliament of the German-speaking Community, the composition and functioning of which are determined by the law. 

§ 2. Without prejudice to Article 137, the regional bodies referred to in Article 39 include a Parliament for each Region. 

Article 116 

§ I. The Community and Regional Parliaments are composed of elected representatives. 

§ 2. Each Community Parliament is composed of members elected directly as members of the Community Parliament concerned or 
as members of a Reglonal Parliament. 

Except when Article 137 is applied, each Regional Parliament is composed of members elected directly as members of the 
Regional Parliament concerned or as members of a Community Parliament. 

Article 117 

Members of the Community and Regional Parliaments are elected for a period of five years. The Community and Regional 
Parliaments are re-elected as a whole every five years. 

Unless a law, adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, specifies otherwise, Community and Regional 
Parliament elections take place on the same day and coincide with European parliamentary elections. 

Article 118 

§ I. Elections referred to in Article I 16, §2, as well as the composition and functioning of Community and Regional 
Parliaments are regulated by the law. Except for the Parliament of the German-speaking Community, such a law is adopted by 
a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

§ 2. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph designates those matters relating to the 
election, composition and functioning of the Flemish Community Parliament, the French Community Parliament and the Walloon 
Region Parliament which are regulated by these Parliaments, each one for matters of its concern, either by federate law or 
by rule as referred to in Article 134, according to the case. This federate law and this rule as referred to in Article 134
are adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that a majority of members of the Parliament concerned is 
present. 

Article I 18bis 

Within the national borders, the members of the Regional and Community Parliaments, referred to in Articles 2 and 3, have 
the right to free travel on all means of transport operated or conceded by the public authorities. 

Article 119 

A member of a Community or Regional Parliament cannot be at the same time a member of the House of Representatives. 
Moreover, neither can he be a senator as referred to in Article 67, § I, I 0, z-, 60 and r. 

Article 120 

All members of Community and Regional Parliaments benefit from the immunities described in Articles 58 and 59. 

SUB-SECTION /I 

ON COMMUNITY AND REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS 

Article 121 

§ I. There is a Government of the Flemish Community and a Government of the French Community, the composition and 
functioning of which are determined by a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

There is a Government of the German-speaking Community, the composition and functioning of which are determined by the law. 

§ 2. Without prejudice to Article 137, the regional bodies referred to in Article 39 include a Government for each Region. 

Article 122 

Members of each Community or Regional Government are elected by their Parliament. 

Article 123 

§ I. The law establishes the composition and functioning of the Community and Regional Governments. Except with regard to 
the Government of the German-speaking Community, this law is adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last 
paragraph. 

§ 2. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph designates those matters relating to the 
composition and functioning of the Flemish Community Government, the French Community Government and the Walloon Region 
Government which are regulated by their Parliaments, each one for matters of its concern, either by federate law or by 
rule as referred to in Article 134, according to the case. This federate law and this rule referred to in Article 134 are 
adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that a majority of the members of the Parliament concerned is 
present. 

Article 124 

No member of a Community or Regional Government can be prosecuted or be the subject of any investigation with regard to 
opinions expressed and votes cast by him in the exercise of his duties. 

Article 125 

Members of a Community or Regional Government are tried exclusively by the appeal court for offences they have allegedly 
committed in the exercise of their duties. The same rule applies in the case of offences allegedly committed by members of 
a Community or Regional Government outside the exercise of their duties and for which they are tried during the exercise 
of their duties. As the case may be, Articles 120 and 59 are not applicable. 

The law determines the manner of proceeding against them, both when they are prosecuted and when they are tried. 

The law designates the appeal court that has jurisdiction, which sits in bane, and specifies its composition. The 
judgments of the appeal court can be appealed to the united chambers of the Supreme Court, which does not pronounce on the 
merits of the case. 

Only the public prosecutor to the appeal court having jurisdiction may institute and lead criminal proceedings against a 
member of a Community or of a Regional Government. 

Authorisation by the Parliament of the Community or Region, each one for matters of its concern, is required for any 
public prosecutor's request to refer the member concerned to a particular court or to discharge him, for his direct 
summons before the appeal court and, except in a case of a flagrant offence, for his arrest. 

The law determines the procedure to be followed when Articles 103 and 125 are both applicable and when there is a double 
application of Article 125. 

A pardon may be granted to a member of a Community or Regional Government convicted in accordance with the first paragraph 
only upon request by the Community or Regional Parliament concerned. 

The law determines in which cases and in accordance with which rules injured parties may bring a civil action. 

The laws referred to in the present article must be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

Transitional provision 

The present article is not applicable to acts which have been the subject of a preliminary judicial investigation or to 
proceedings instituted prior to the entry into force of the law implementing the article. 

In such a case, the following rule applies: the Community or Regional Parliament concerned has the right to indict members 
of their Government and to bring them before the Supreme Court. Only the united chambers of this court have jurisdiction 
to try ministers in cases covered by the criminal laws and by application of the penalties prescribed by such laws.The 
special Law of 28 February 1997 concerning the temporary and partial implementation of Article 125 of the Constitution 
remains applicable in such cases. 

Article 126 

Constitutional provisions that apply to members of the Regional and Community Governments, as well as the implementing 
laws referred to in Article 125, last paragraph apply equally to Regional secretaries of State. 

SECTION II 

ON RESPONSIBIUTIES 

SUa-SECTION I 

ON THE RESPONSIBIUTIES OF THE COMMUNITIES 

Article 127 

§ I. The Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities, each one in so far as it is concerned, regulate by federate 
law: 

I" cultural matters; 

2" education, with the exception of: 

a) the setting of the beginning and of the end of compulsory education; 

b) minimum standards for the granting of diplomas; 

c) the pension scheme; 

3" cooperation between the Communities, as well as international cooperation, including the concluding of treaties for 
those matters referred to in I" and 2". 

A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph designates the cultural matters referred to in I '" 
and determines the forms of cooperation referred to in 3", as well as the specific arrangements for the concluding of 
treaties referred to in 3". 

§ 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the Dutch-speaking and French­ speaking regions respectively, as well 
as in those institutions established in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital which. because of their activities, must 
be considered as belonging exclusively to one Community or the other. 

Article 128 

§ I. The Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities regulate by federate law, each one in so far as it is 
concerned, person-related matters, as well as, in such matters, cooperation between the Communities and international 
cooperation, including the concluding of treaties. 

A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph designates such person-related matters and 
determines the forms of cooperation,as well as the specific arrangements for the concluding of treaties. 

§ 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the Dutch-speaking and French­ speaking regions respectively, as well 
as - unless a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph determines otherwise - with regard to 
those institutions established in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital which, because of their organisation, must be 
considered as belonging exclusively to one Community or the other. 

Article 129 

§ I. The Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities, to the exclusion of the federal legislator; regulate by 
federate law, each one as far as it is concerned, the use of languages for: 

10 administrative matters; 

T' education in the establishments created, subsidised or recognised by the public authorities; 

30 social relations between employers and their personnel, as well as company acts and documents required by the law and 
by regulations. 

§ 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the Dutch-speaking and French­ speaking regions respectively, except as 
concerns: 

- the municipalities or groups of municipalities adjacent to another linguistic Region and in which the law prescribes or 
permits the use of another language than that of the Region in which they are located. For these municipalities, a change 
to the rules governing the use of languages in the matters as described in § I may be made only by a law adopted by a 
majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph; 

- services whose activities extend beyond the lmgulstic region within which they are located; 

- federal and international institutions designated by the law whose activities are common to more than one Community. 

Article 130 

§ I. The Parliament of the German-speaking Community regulates by federate law: 10 cultural matters; 

T' person-related matters; 

3° education, within the limits established by Article 127, § I, first paragraph, r; 

cooperation between the Communities, as well as international cooperation, including the conclusion of treaties, for 
matters referred to in 1°, rand 3°; 

5° the use of languages for education in establishments created, subsidised or recognised by the public authorities. 

The law designates the cultural and person-related matters referred to in I Q and 2" and determines the forms of 
cooperation referred to in 4", as well as the manner in which treaties are concluded. 

§ 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the German-speaking region. 

Article 131 

The law determines the measures designed to prevent aU forms of discrimination for ideolOgical or philosophical reasons. 

Article 132 

The right to propose legislation belongs to the Community Government and to the members of the Community Parliament. 

Article 133 

Only the federate law can give an authoritative interpretation of federate laws. 

SUB-SECTION II 

ON THE COMPETENCES OF THE REGIONS 

Article 134 

Laws passed in order to execute Article 39 determine the judicial force of the rules which the bodies that they create 
enact in matters which they determine. 

They can confer to these bodies the power to pass federate laws that have the force of law, within the jurisdiction and 
in the manner that they determine. 

SUB-SECTION III SPEGAL PROVISIONS 

Article 135 

A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph designates the authorities which exercise for the 
bilingual region of Brussels-Capital the competences not assigned to the Communities in the matters referred to in Article 
128, § I. 

Article 136 

There are linguistic groups within the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region, as well as executive colleges, 
responsible for Community matters; their composition, functioning and competences and, without prejudice to Article 175, 
their financing are regulated by a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

The colleges together form the United College, which acts as a consultation and coordination body between the two 
Communities. 

Article 137 

With a view to the application of Article 39, the Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities, as well as their 
respective Governments, may exercise the competences, respectively, of the Flemish Region and of the Walloon Region, under 
the conditions and according to the terms set by the law. This law must be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, 
last paragraph. 

Article 138 

The Parliament of the French Community, on one hand, and the Parliament of the Walloon Region and the French linguistic 
group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region, on the other hand, may decide by common accord and each by 
federate law, that in the French-speaking region, the Parliament and the Government of the Walloon Region and, in the 
bilingual region of Brussels-Capital, the French linguistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region and its 
executive college exercise, in full or in part, competences of the French Community. 

These federate laws are adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast within the Parliament of the French Community 
and by absolute majority of the votes cast within the Parliament of the Walloon Region and within the French linguistic 
group in the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region, provided that a majority of the Parliament members or of the 
members of the linguistic group concerned is present. They can regulate the financing of the competences which they 
designate, as well as the transfer of personnel, assets, rights and obligations linked with these cornpetences. 

These competences are exercised, according to the case, by means of federate laws, decisions or regulations. 

Article 139 

Upon proposal by their respective Governments, the Parliament of the German­ speaking Community and the Parliament of the 
Walloon Region can, each by federate law, decide by common accord that the Parliament and the Government of the 
German-speaking Community exercise, in whole or in part, competences of the Walloon Region. 

These competences are exercised, according to the case, by means of federate laws, decisions or regulations. 

Article 140 

The Parliament and the Government of the German-speaking Community exercise by means of decisions and regulations all 
other competences attributed to them by the law. 

Article 159 is applicable to these decisions and regulations. 

CHAPTERV 

ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT, AND THE PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS 

SECTION 1 

ON THE PREVENTION OF CONFUaS OF COMPETENCE 

Article 141 

The law organises a procedure to prevent conflicts between laws, federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134. as 
well as between federate laws themselves and between the rules referred to in Article 134 themselves. 

SECTION II 

ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT 

Article 142 

There is for all Belgium a Constitutional Court, the composition. competenees and 

functioning of which are established by the law. 

This Court rules by means of judgments on: 

I " those conflicts referred to in Article 141; 

2" the violation of Articles 10. I I and 24 by a law. a federate law or a rule as referred to in Article 134; 

3" the violation of constitutional articles that the law determines by a law. a federate law or by a rule as referred to 
in Article 134. 

A matter may be referred to the Court by any authority designated by the law, by any person that can prove an interest or, 
pre-judicially, by any court. 

The laws referred to in the first paragraph, in the second paragraph, 3° and in the third paragraph are adopted by a 
majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

SECTION JJJ 

ON THE PREVENTION AND THE SETTI.£MENT OF CONR.ICTS OF INTEREST 

Article 143 

§ I. In the exercise of their respective responsibilities, the federal State, the Communities, the Regions and the joint 
Community Commission act with respect for federal loyalty, in order to prevent conflicts of interest. 

§ 2. The Senate makes decisions, by means of reasoned opinions, on conflicts of interest which may arise between the 
assemblies which legislate through laws, federate laws or rules as referred to in Article 134, under the conditions and 
in the manner determined by a law adopted by a majority as referred to in Article 4. last paragraph. 

§ 3. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4. last paragraph organises a procedure designed to prevent and 
to settle conflicts of interest between the Federal Government. the Community and Regional Governments and the United 
College of the joint Community Commission. 

Transitional provision 

Concerning the prevention and the settlement of conflicts of interest, the ordinary law of 9 August 1980 on institutional 
reforms remains valid; however; it can only be repealed, completed, corrected or replaced by those laws mentioned in §§ 2 
and 3. 

CHAPTERVI 

ON JUDICIAL POWER 

Article 144 

Disputes about civil rights belong exclusively to the competence of the courts. 

Article 145 

Disputes about political rights belong to the competence of the courts, except for the exceptions established by the law. 

Article 146 

A court and a body capable of rendering judgment can only be established by virtue of a law. No extraordinary courts or 
commissions may be created, no matter under which designation. 

Article 147 

There is a Supreme Court for all Belgium. 

This Court has no competence over the substance of the case. 

Article 148 

Court hearings are public, unless such public access endangers morals or the peace; if such is the case, the Court so 
declares in a judgment 

In cases of political or press offences, proceedings can only be conducted in camera on the basis of a unanimous vote. 

Article 149 

Each judgment is supported by reasons. It is pronounced publicly. 

Article 150 

A jury is sworn in for all criminal matters, as well as for political and press offences, with the exception of press 
offences motivated by racism or xenophobia 

Article 151 

§ I. Judges are independent in the exercise of their jurisdictional competences.The public prosecutor is independent in 
conducting individual investigations and prosecutions, without prejudice to the right of the competent minister to order 
prosecutions and to prescribe binding directives on criminal policy, including policy on investigations and prosecutions. 

§ 2. There is one High Council of Justice for all Belgium. In the exercise of its competences, the High Council of 
Justice respects the independence referred to in § I. 

The High Council of Justice is composed of a Dutch-speaking college and of a French-speaking college. Each college 
comprises an equal number of members and is constituted with equal representation, on the one hand, of judges and officers 
of the public prosecutor's office elected directly by their peers under the conditions and in the manner determined by the 
law and, on the other hand, of other members appointed by the Senate by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, under 
conditions established by the law. 

Within each college, there is a nomination and appointment committee, as well as an advisory and investigatory committee,
which are constituted with equal representation in accordance with the provision laid down in the preceding paragraph. 

The law specifies the composition of the High Council of Justice, of its colleges and of their committees, as well as the 
conditions under which and the manner in which they exercise their competences. 

§ 3. The High Council of Justice exercises its competences in the following areas: 

I o the nomination of candidates for appointment as judge, as referred to in § 4, first paragraph or for appointment as 
officer of the public prosecutor's office; 

T' the nomination of candidates for an appointment to the positions referred to in 

§ 5, first paragraph and to the position of head of the public prosecutor's office; 

3° access to the position of judge or of officer of the public prosecutor's office; 4° training of judges and of officers 
of the public prosecutor's office; 

5° drafting of general profiles for the positions referred to in r; 

60 voicing of advice and of proposals concerning the general operation and organisation of the judiciary; 

T" general surveillance on and the promoting of the use of means of internal control; 

8° to the exclusion of all disciplinary and criminal competences: 

- the receiving and the following-up of complaints relating to the operation of the judiciary; 

- the conducting of an enquiry on the operation of the judiciary. 

Under the conditions and in the manner determined by the law, the competences referred to in 10 to 4° are assigned to the 
relevant nomination and appointment committee, and the competences referred to in 5° to 8° are assigned to the relevant 
advisory and investigatory committee. The law determines the cases in which and the manner in which the nomination and 
appointment committees and the advisory and investigatory committees exercise their competences jointly; 

A law to be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph determines the other competences of this 
Council. 

§ 4. The justices of the peace and the judges of the courts and of the Supreme Court are appointed by the King under the 
conditions and in the manner specified by the law. 

Such appointment is made on reasoned nomination by the relevant nomination and appointment committee, by a majority of 
two thirds in accordance with the terms specified by the law and after evaluation of qualifications and aptitude. The 
nomination can be rejected only in the manner specified by the law and with justification. 

In the case of appointment of an appeal judge or of a judge of the Supreme Court, the general assembly of the court 
concerned issues a reasoned opinion in the manner specified by the law, prior to the nomination referred to in the 
preceding paragraph. 

§ 5. The first president of the Supreme Court, the first presidents of the appeal courts and the presidents of the lower 
courts are appointed to those positions by the King under the conditions and in the manner specified by the law. 

Such appointment is made on reasoned nomination by the relevant nomination and appointment committee, by a majority of 
two thirds in accordance with the terms specified by the law and after evaluation of qualifications and aptitude. The 
nomination may be rejected only in the manner specified by the law and with justification. 

In the case of appointment to the position of first president of the Supreme Court or of first president of an appeal 
court, the general assembly of the court concerned issues a reasoned opinion in the manner specified by the law, prior to 
the nomination referred to in the preceding paragraph. 

The president of the Supreme Court, the presidents of the sections of this court, the presidents of the divisions of the 
appeal courts and the vice-presidents of the lower courts are appointed to their positions by the courts from their midst 
under the conditions and in the manner specified by the law. 

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 152, the law specifies the duration of the appointment to these positions. 

§ 6. In the manner specified by the law, the judges, the incumbents of the positions referred to in § 5, fourth paragraph 
and the officers of the public prosecutor's office are subject to an evaluation. 

Transitional provision 

The provisions of §§ 3 to 6 enter into force after the setting up of the High Council of Justice, referred to in § 2. 

On that date, it is assumed that the first president and the president of the Supreme Court, the presidents of the 
sections of this court, the first presidents of the appeal courts, the presidents of the divisions of these courts and 
the presidents and vice-presidents of the lower courts are appointed to these positions for the duration and under the 
conditions specified by the law and that they are appointed at the same time to the Supreme Court, to the appeal court or 
to the labour court and to the corresponding lower court, respectively. 

In the meantime, the following provisions remain applicable: 

The justices of the peace and the judges of the lower courts are appointed directly by the King. 

The judges of the appeal courts and the presidents and vice-presidents of the courts of first instance under their 
jurisdiction are appointed by the King from two lists each with two candidates, one submitted by these courts, the other 
by the provincial councils and the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region, depending upon the case. 

The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the King from two lists each with two candidates, one submitted by the 
Supreme Court, the other alternately by the House of Representatives and by the Senate. 

In these two cases, the candidates placed on one list may also appear on the other. All the nominations are made public 
at least fifteen days before the appointment. The courts choose from among themselves their presidents and Vice-presidents. 

Article 152 

Judges are appointed for life. They retire at an age determined by the law and receive the pension provided for by the law. 

No judge can be deprived of his post or suspended except by a court decision. The transfer of a judge can only take place 
by his appointment to a new position and with his consent. 

Article 153 

The King appoints and dismisses officials of the public prosecutor's offices attached to the courts. 

Article 154 

Salaries of members of the judicature are determined by the law. 

Article 155 

A judge cannot accept a salaried position from a Government, unless this position is exercised free of charge, and even 
then, such a position must not entail an incompatibility as determined by the law. 

Article 156 

There are five appeal courts in Belgium: 

I 0 that of Brussels, with jurisdiction over the provinces of Flemish Brabant, of Walloon Brabant and the bilingual 
region of Brussels-Capital; 

T' that of Ghent, with jurisdiction over the provinces of West Flanders and East Flanders; 

3° that of Antwerp, with jurisdiction over the provinces of Antwerp and Limburg; 4° that of Liege, with jurisdiction over 
the provinces of Liege, Namur and Luxembourg; 

5° that of Mons, with jurisdiction over the province of Hainaut. 

Article 157 

There are military courts when a state of war referred to in Article 167, § I, second paragraph has been stated to exist.
The organisation of the military courts, their powers, their members' rights and obligations as well as their members' 
terms of office are determined by the law. 

There are commercial courts in the places determined by the law. The law lays down rules for their organisation, their 
powers, the way their members are appointed as well as their members' terms of office. 

The law also lays down rules for the organisation of the labour courts, their powers, the way their members are appointed 
as well as their members' terms of office. 

There are courts for the enforcement of penalties in the places determined by the law. The law lays down rules for their 
organisation, their powers, the way their members are appointed as well as their members' terms of office. 

Transitional provision 

The first paragraph becomes effective on the date of repeal of the Law of 15 June 1899 containing Titles I and II of the
Military Penal Procedure Code. 

Until then, the following provision remains effective: 

Specific laws regulate the organisation of the military courts, their powers, their members' rights and obligations as 
well as their members' terms of office. 

Article 158 

The Supreme Court makes decisions in conflicts of powers in the manner provided for by the law. 

Article 159 

Courts only apply general, provincial or local decisions and regulations provided that they are in accordance with the law. 

CHAPTERVII 

ON THE COUNCIL OF STATE AND ADMINISTRATIVE COURTS 

Artide 160 

There is a Council of State for all Belgium, the composition, ccmpetences and functioning of which are determined by the 
law. However, the law can give the King the power to establish the procedure in accordance with the principles that it 
determines. 

The Council of State makes decisions by means of judgments as an administrative court and provides an opinion in the cases 
determined by the law. 

Article 161 

An administrative court can only be established by virtue of a law. 

CHAPTERVIII 

ON PROVINCIAL AND MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 

Artide 162 

Provincial and municipal institutions are regulated by the law.The law guarantees the application of the following 
principles: 

I 0 the direct election of the members of provincial and municipal councils; 

2" the attribution to provincial and municipal councils of aU that is of provincial and municipal interest, without 
prejudice to the approval of their acts in the cases and in the manner that the law determines; 

30 the decentralisation of competences to provincial and municipal institutions; 

4" the public nature of provincial and municipal council meetings, within the limits established by the law; 

5" the disclosure of accounts and budgets; 

60 the intervention of the supervisory authority or of the federal legislative power to prevent the law from being 
violated or publtc interests from being harmed. 

In accordance with a law adopted by a majority as described inArtide 4, last paragraph, the organisation and exercise of 
administrative supervision can be regulated by the Community or Regional Parliaments. 

In accordance with a law adopted by a majority as described in Artide 4, last paragraph, the federate law or the rule 
referred to in Article 134 establishes the conditions and the manner in which several provinces or municipalities can 
cooperate or form associations. However, provincial councils or municipal councils cannot be permitted to deliberate 
jointly. 

Article 163 

The competences exercised in the Flemish and Walloon Regions by elected provincial bodies are exercised, in the bilingual 
region of Brussels-Capital, by the Flemish and French Communities and by the JOint Community Commission, each with 
respect to matters falling under their responsibility in pursuance of Articles 127 and 128 and, with respect to other 
matters, by the Brussels-Capital Region. 

However, a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph establishes the detailed rules by which 
the Brussels-Capital Region or any institution whose members are designated by the latter exercise the competences 
described in the first paragraph which do not belong to those matters referred to in Article 39. A law adopted by the same 
majority lays down rules for the attribution to those institutions described in Article 136 of all or part of the 
competences referred to in the first paragraph that belong to those matters described in Articles 127 and 128. 

Article 164 

The drafting of registry office certificates relating to civil status and the maintenance of registers fall exclusively 
under the responsibility of the municipal authorities. 

Article 165 

§ I. The law creates metropolitan districts and federations of municipalities. It determines their organisation and their 
competences and, when doing so, guarantees the application of the principles described in Article 162. 

Each metropolitan district has a council and an executive college. 

The president of the executive college is elected by the council from its midst; his election is ratified by the King; 
the law establishes his status. 

Articles 159 and 190 apply to the decisions and regulations of the metropolitan districts and the federations of 
municipalities. 

The boundaries of the metropolitan districts and of the federations of municipalities can only be changed or corrected by 
virtue of a law. 

§ 2. The law creates the body within which each metropolitan district and the nearest federations of municipalities 
consult each other under the conditions and in the manner which the law establishes to examine common problems of a 
technical nature that fall under their respective competence. 

§ 3. Several federations of municipalities may cooperate or form associations with each other or with one or more 
metropolitan districts in accordance with the conditions and in the manner prescribed by the law to jointly regulate and 
manage those issues that fall within their competence. Their councils are not permitted to deliberate [ointly, 

Article 166 

§ I. Article 165 applies to the metropolitan district to which the capital of the Kingdom belongs, with the exception of
what is provided for hereinafter. 

§ 2. The competences of the metropolitan district to which the capital of the Kingdom belongs are, in the manner 
determined by a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, exercised by the bodies of the 
Brussels-Capital Region created by virtue of Article 39. 

§ 3. The bodies described in Article 136: 

10 possess, each for its Community, the same competences as the other organising powers with respect to cultural, 
educational and person-related matters; 

T' exercise, each for its Community, the cornpetences delegated to them by the Flemish Community Parliament and by the 
French Community Parliament; 

30 [ointly regulate those matters described in 10 which are of common interest. 

TITLE IV 

ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 

Article 167 

§ I. The King directs international relations, notwithstanding the competence of Communities and Regions to regulate 
international cooperation, including the concluding of treaties, for those matters that fall within their competences in 
pursuance of or by virtue of the Constitution. 

The King commands the armed forces; he states that there exists a state of war or that hostilities have ceased. He 
notifies the Houses with additional appropriate messages as soon as interests and security of the State permit. 

Cession, exchange or expansion of territory can only take place by virtue of a law. 

§ 2. The King concludes treaties, with the exception of those regarding matters described in § 3. These treaties take 
effect only after they have received the approval of the Houses. 

§ 3. The Community and Regional Governments described in Article 121 conclude, each one in so far as it is concerned, 
treaties regarding matters that fall within the competence of their Parliament. These treaties take effect only after 
they have received the approval of the Parliament. 

§ 4. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph fixes the specific rules for the concluding of 
treaties described in § 3 and of the treaties that do not exclusively concern matters falling within the competence of 
the Regions or Communities in pursuance of or by virtue of the Constitution. 

§ 5. The King, by common consent with the Community or Regional Governments concerned, can denounce treaties concluded 
before 18 May 1993 and covering matters described in § 3. 

The King denounces these treaties if the Community or Regional Governments concerned invite him to do so. A law adopted 
by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph establishes the procedure in the event of disagreement between 
the Community and Regional Governments concerned. 

Article 168 

From the beginning, the Houses are informed of negotiations concerning any revision of the treaties establishing the 
European Community and the treaties and acts which have modified or complemented them. They receive the draft treaty 
before its signature. 

Article 169 

In order to ensure the observance of international or supranational obligations, the authorities mentioned in Articles 36 
and 37 can, provided that the conditions stipulated by the law are met, temporarily replace the bodies mentioned in 
Articles I 15 and 121. This law must be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

TITLE V 

ON FINANCES 

Article 170 

§ I. Taxes to the benefit of the State can only be introduced by a law. 

§ 2. Taxes to the benefit of a Community or Region can only be introduced by a federate law or a rule as described in 
Article 134. 

The law determines, with respect to the taxes referred to in the first paragraph, the exceptions that are proved to be 
necessary. 

§ 3. A charge or tax can only be introduced by a province by the decision of its council. 

The law determines, with respect to the taxes described in the first paragraph, the exceptions that are proved to be 
necessary. 

The law can abolish, either totally or partially, the taxes referred to in the first paragraph. 

§ 4. A charge or tax can only be introduced by the metropolitan districts, federations of municipalities or by the 
municipalities by a decision of their council. 

The law determines, with respect to the taxes referred to in the first paragraph, the exceptions that are proved to be 
necessary. 

Article 171 

Taxes to the benefit of the State, a Community or a Region are subject to an annual vote. 

The rules which introduce them are valid only for one year if they are not renewed. 

Article 172 

No privileges with regard to taxes can be introduced. 

No exemption or reduction of taxes can be introduced except by a law. 

Article 173 

Except to the benefit of the provinces, the bodies responsible for polders and for draining and flood protection, and 
except for the cases formally excepted by the laws, 

the federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134, charges can only be claimed from citizens in the form of taxes to 
the benefit of the State, the Community, the Region, the metropolitan district, the federation of municipalities or the 
municipality. 

Article 174 

Each year, the House of Representatives passes the law that settles the final accounts and approves the budget. However, 
the House of Representatives and the Senate fix their respective operating allowances annually. 

All State receipts and expenditure must be included in the budget and in the accounts. 

Article 175 

A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph establishes the system for financing the Flemish 
Community and the French Community. 

The Flemish and French Community Parliaments, each one for matters of its concern, decide by federate law upon the use of 
their revenues. 

Article 176 

A law establishes the system for financing the German-speaking Community. 

The Parliament of the German-speaking Community decides by federate law upon the use of its revenues. 

Article 177 

A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph establishes the system for financing the Regions. 

Regional Parliaments determine, each one for matters of its concern, the use of their revenues, by means of the rules 
referred to in Article 134. 

Article 178 

Under the conditions and in the manner stipulated by a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last 
paragraph, the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region transfers, by the rule referred to in Article 134, financial 
means to the JOint Community Commission and to the Flemish and French Community Commissions. 

Article 179 

No pension or gratuity payable by the public treasury can be attributed other than by virtue of a law. 

Article 180 

Members of the Court of Audit are appointed by the House of Representatives for a term established by the law. 

This Court is responsible for examining and validating the general administration accounts and the accounts of all 
accounting officers answerable to the public treasury. It must see that no budgetary item is surpassed and that no 
transfers take place.The Court also has general oversight of operations relating to the establishment and collection of 
entitlements owed to the State, including tax receipts. It clears the accounts of the various State administrations and 
is responsible for collecting all information and accounting documents needed for that purpose. General accounts of the 
State are submitted to the House of Representatives with the Court of Audit's observations. 

This Court is organised by the law. 

Article 181 

§ I. The salaries and pensions of ministers of religion are paid for by the State; the amounts required are charged 
annually to the budget. 

§ 2.The salaries and pensions of representatives of organisations recognised by the law as providing moral assistance 
according to a non-denominational philosophical concept are paid for by the State; the amounts required are charged 
annually to the budget. 

TITLEVI 

ON THE ARMED FORCES AND THE POLICE SERVICE 

Article 182 

Army recruitment methods are determined by the law. The law also regulates the promotion, the rights and the duties of 
military personnel. 

Article 183 

Military quotas are subject to an annual vote. The law that determines them is valid only for one year if it is not 
renewed. 

Article 184 

The organisation and competence of the integrated police service, structured at two levels, are regulated by the law. The 
essential features of the status of the members of the personnel of the integrated police service, structured at two 
levels, are regulated by the law. 

Transitional provision 

However; the King can decide upon and implement the essential features of the status of the members of the personnel of 
the integrated police service, structured at two levels, provided that this decree, with regard to these features, is 
confirmed by the law before 30 April 2002. 

Article 185 

Foreign troops may only be admitted to the service of the State,or occupy or cross the territory by virtue of a law. 

Article 186 

Military personnel can only be deprived of rank, honours and pensions in the manner described by the law. 

TITLE VII 

GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Article 187 

The Constitution cannot be wholly or partially suspended. 

Article 188 

From the day on which the Constitution becomes enforceable, all laws, decrees, decisions, regulations and other acts that 
are contrary to it are abrogated. 

Article 189 

The text of the Constitution is drafted in Dutch, in French and in German. 

Article 190 

No law or decision, or regulation of general, provincial or municipal administration is binding until it has been 
published in the manner described by the law. 

Article 191 

All foreigners on Belgian soil benefit from the protection provided to persons and property, except for those exceptions 
provided for by the law. 

Article 192 

An oath can only be made obligatory by virtue of a law. The law determines the wording. 

Article 193 

The Belgian Nation adopts red, yellow and black colours, and as arms of the kingdom the Lion of Belgium with the motto: 
UNION IS STRENGTH. 

Article 194 

The city of Brussels is the capital of Belgium and the seat of the Federal Government. 

TITLE VIII 

ON THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION 

Article 195 

The federal legislative power has the right to declare that there are reasons to revise 

such constitutional provision as it determines. 

Following such a declaration, the two Houses are automatically dissolved. Two new Houses are then convened, in accordance 
with Article 46. 

These Houses make decisions, in common accord with the King, on the points submitted for revision. 

In this case, the Houses can only debate provided that at least two thirds of the members who make up each House are 
present; and no change is adopted unless it is supported by at least two thirds of the votes cast. 

Article 196 

No constitutional revision can be started or pursued during times of war or when the Houses are prevented from meeting 
freely on federal territory. 

Article 197 

During a regency, no changes can be made to the Constitution regarding the constitutional powers of the King and Articles 
85 to 88,91 to 95, 106 and 197 of the Constitution. 

Article 198 

In agreement with the King, the Constituent Houses can change the numbering of articles and of subdivisions of the 
articles of the Constitution, as well as the subdivisions of the latter into titles, chapters and sections, modify the 
terminology of provisions not submitted for revision in order to harmonise them with the terminology of new provisions 
and to ensure the concordance of the Dutch, French and German texts of the Constitution. 

In this case, the Houses can debate only provided that at least two thirds of the members who make up each House are 
present; and no change will be adopted unless it is supported by at least two thirds of the votes cast. 

TITLE IX 

THE ENTRY INTO FORCE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

I. - The provisions of Article 85 will for the first time be applicable to the progeny of H.R.H. Prince Albert, Felix, 
Humbert, Theodore, Christian, Eugene, Marie, Prince of liege, Prince of Belgium, it being understood that the marriage of 
H.R.H. PrincessAstrid, Josephine, Charlotte, Fabrizla, Elisabeth, Paola, Marie, Princess of Belgium to Lorenz, Archduke of 
Austria-Este, is regarded as having obtained the consent described in Article 85, second paragraph. 

Until such time, the following provisions remain in effect. 

The constitutional powers of the King are hereditary through the direct, natural and legitimate descent from H.M. Leopold, 
George, Christian, Frederick of Saxe-Coburg, from male to male, by order of primogeniture and with the permanent exclusion 
of women and of their descendants. 

The prince who marries without the King's consent or, in his absence, without the consent of those exercising the King's 
powers in cases provided for by the Constitution shall be deprived of his right to the crown. 

Nonetheless, this right may be restored by the King or, in his absence, by those exercising the powers of the King in 
cases provided for by the Constitution, but only with the assent of both Houses. 

II. [Repealed] 

ilL-Article 125 is valid for events taking place after 8 May 1993. 

IV. [Repealed] 

V. [Repealed] 

VI. - § I. [Repealed] 

§ 2. [Repealed] 

§ 3. The personnel and the assets of the province of Brabant will be divided between the province of Flemish Brabant, the 
province of Walloon Brabant, the Brussels-Capital Region, the authorities and the institutions described in Articles I 35 
and I 36, as well as the federal authority, in accordance with the terms determined by a law adopted by a majority as 
described in Article 4, last paragraph. 

Following the next renewal of the provincial councils and until they are divided, personnel and assets remaining in common 
will be jointly managed by the province of Flemish Brabant, the province of Walloon Brabant and by the authorities which 
are competent in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital. 

§ 4. [Repealed] 

§ 5. [Repealed] 

