BELIZE CONSTITUTION CHAPTER 4 

AS UPDATED TO AUGUST 2011 

BELIZE CONSTITUTION ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS PART I 

The State and The Constitution 

1. The State. 

2. Constitution is supreme law. 

PART II 

Protection of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms 

3. Fundamental rights and freedoms. 

4. Protection of right to life. 

5. Protection of right to personal liberty. 

6. Protection of law. 

7. Protection from inhuman treatment. 

8. Protection from slavery and forced labour. 

9. Protection from arbitrary search or entry. 

10. Protection of freedom of movement. 

11. Protection of freedom of conscience. 

12. Protection of freedom of expression. 

13. Protection of freedom of assembly and association. 

14. Protection of right of privacy. 

15. Protection of right to work. 

16. Protection from discrimination on the grounds of race, etc. 

17. Protection from deprivation of property. 

18. Provisions for periods of public emergency. 

19. Protection of persons detained under emergency laws. 

20. Enforcement of protective provisions. 

21. Protection of existing laws. 

22. Interpretation and savings. 

PART III 

Citizenship 

23. Persons who become citizens on Independence Day. 

24. Persons born in Belize on or after Independence Day. 

25. Persons born outside Belize on or after Independence Day. 

26. Registration. 

27. Dual nationality. 

28. Citizenship legislation. 

29. Interpretation. 

PART IV 

The Governor-General 

30. Establishment of office. 

31. Acting Governor-General. 

32. Oath to be taken by Governor-General. 

33. Deputy to Governor-General. 

34. Exercise of Governor-General's function. 

35 . Governor-General to be informed concerning matters of government. 

PART V 

The Executive 

36. Executive authority. 

37. Prime Minister. 

38. Deputy Prime Minister. 

39. Performance of functions of Prime Minister during absence or illness. 

40. Ministers of Government. 

41. Allocation of portfolios to Ministers. 

42. Attorney-General. 

43. Performance of functions of Ministers during absence or illness. 

44. Cabinet. 

45.   Ministers of State.   
46.   Oath to be taken by Ministers, etc.   
47.   Leader of the Opposition.   
48.   Chief Executive Officer.   
49.   Secretary to the Cabinet.   
50.   Control of public prosecutions.   
51.   Constitution of offices, etc.   
52.   Prerogative of mercy.   
53.   Procedure in capital cases.   
54.   Belize Advisory Council.   

PART VI 

The Legis lature 

55. Establishment of Legislature. 

House of Representatives 

56. Composition of House of Representatives. 

57. Qualifications for election as member. 

58. Disqualifications for election as member. 

59. Tenure of office of members. 

59A. Procedure where a member vacates seat due to resignation or crossing the floor. 

60. Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 

    The Senate   
  61.   Composition of Senate.   
  61A.   Powers and functions of the Senate.   
  62.   Qualifications for appointment as Senator.   
  63.   Disqualifications for appointment as Senator.   
  64.   Tenure of office of Senator.   
  65.   Appointment of temporary Senators.   
  66.   President and Vice-President.   
  67.   Clerks to Houses of National Assembly.   
    Powers and Procedure   
  68.   Power to make laws.   
  69.   Alteration of Constitution.   

70. Regulation of procedure in National Assembly, etc. 

71. Oath to be taken by members ofN ational Assembly. 

72. Presiding in House of Representatives and Senate. 

73. Voting. 

74. Freedom of speech. 

75. Validity of proceedings. 

76. Quorum. 

77. Introduction of Bills, etc. 

78. Restriction on powers of Senate as to money Bills. 

79. Restriction on powers of Senate as to Bills other than money Bills. 

80. Provisions relating to sections 77, 78 and 79. 

81. Mode of exercise of legislative power. 

82. Words of enactment. 

83. Sessions of Legislature, etc. 

84. Prorogation and dissolution of Legislature. 

85. General elections and appointment of Senators. 

86. Determination of questions as to membership of National Assembly. 

87. Unqualified persons sitting or voting. 

88. Elections and Boundaries Commission. 

89. Electoral divisions. 

90. Increase of electoral divisions. 

91. Redivision of electoral divisions. 

92. Conduct of voting. 

93. Conduct of elections, etc. 

    PART VII   
    The Judiciary   
  93A.   Magistracy   
  94.   Establishment of Supreme Court and Court of Appeal.   
  95.   The Supreme Court.   
  96.   Referral of certain questions to the Supreme Court and   
    the Caribbean Court of Justice.   
  97.   Appointment of Justices of Supreme Court.   
  98.   Tenure of office of Justices of Supreme Court.   
  99.   Oath to be taken by Justices of Supreme Court.   
  100.   Appeals to the Court of Appeal.   
  101.   Appointment of Justices of Appeal.   
  102.   Tenure of office of Justices of Appeal.   
  103.   Oath to be taken by Justices of Appeal.   
  104.   Appeals to the Caribbean Court of Justice.   

PART VIII 

SUB-PART I 

The Public Services Commission 

105. Public Services Commission. 

106. Appointment, etc., of public officers. 

107. Appointment, etc., of Chief Executive Officers and certain other officers. 

108. Director of Public Prosecutions. 

109. Auditor-General. 

110. Repealed. 

110A. Repealed. 

110B. Appointment, etc., of junior officers of Prison Service. 

SUB-PART II 

The Security Services Commission 

110C. Security Services Commission. 

11 OD. Appointment of police officers, members ofthe Belize Defence Force, etc. 

SUB-PART III 

The Judicial and Legal Services Commission 

110E. Judicial and Legal Services Commission. 

11 OF. Appointment of judicial and legal officers, etc. 

SUB-PART IV 

Appeals in Discipline Cases. 

111. Appeals in discipline cases. 

SUB-PART V 

Pension Laws and Pension Rights of Public Officers 

112. Pension laws and protection of pension rights. 

113. Grant and withholding of pensions, etc. 

PART IX 

Finance 

114. Establishment of Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

115. Authorisation of expenditure from Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

116.   Authorisation   of expenditure   In   advance of   
  appropriation.         
117.   Contingencies Fund.       
118.   Remuneration of certain officers.       
119.   Public debt.         
120.   Audit of public accounts, etc.       

PART X 

Miscellaneous 

121. Code of Conduct. 

122. National Symbols. 

123. Powers of appointment and acting appointments. 

124. Reappointments and concurrent appointments. 

125. Removal from office. 

126. Resignations. 

127. Saving of jurisdiction of courts. 

128. Power to amend and revoke instruments, etc. 

129. Consultation. 

130. National Seal. 

131. Interpretation. 

PART XI 

Transitional Provisions 

132.   Interpretation of this Part.   
133.   The Constitution - transitional powers.   
134.   Existing laws.   
135.   First Governor-General.   
136.   Ministers.   
137.   National Assembly.   
138.   Existing public officers.   
139.   Supreme Court and Court of Appeal.   
140.   Alteration of this Part.   

PART XII 

Repeal and Date of Commencement 

141. Commencement. 

142. Revocations. 

SCHEDULE 1 

Definition of Belize 

SCHEDULE 2 

Alteration of Constitution 

SCHEDULE 3 

Form of Oath and Form of Affirmation 

SCHEDULE 4 

Revocations 


WHEREAS the people of Belize- 

(a) affirm that the Nation of Belize shall be founded upon principles which acknowledge the supremacy of God, faith in 
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the position of the family in a society of free men and free institutions, the 
dignity of the human person and the equal and inalienable rights with which all members of the human family are endowed by 
their Creator; 

(b) respect the principles of social justice and therefore believe that the operation of the economic system must result 
in the material resources of the community being so distributed as to subserve the common good, that there should be 
adequate means of livelihood for all, that labour should not be exploited or forced by economic necessity to operate in 
inhumane conditions but that there should be opportunity for advancement on the basis of recognition of merit, ability and 
integrity, that equal protection should be given to children regardless of their social status, and that a just system 
should be ensured to provide for education and health on the basis of equality; 


Commencement. 

(c) believe that the will of the people shall form the basis of government in a democratic society in which the government 
is freely elected by universal adult suffrage and in which all persons may, to the extent of their capacity, play some 
part in the institutions of national life and thus develop and maintain due respect for lawfully constituted authority; 

(d) recognise that men and institutions remain free only when freedom is founded upon respect for moral and spiritual 
values and upon the rule of law; 

(e) 

require policies of state which protect and safeguard the unity, freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Belize;
which eliminate economic and social privilege and disparity among the citizens of Belize whether by race, ethnicity, 
colour, creed, disability or sex; which ensures gender equality; which protect the rights of the individual to life, 
liberty, basic education, basic health, the right to vote in elections, the right to work and the pursuit of happiness; 
which protect the identity, dignity and social and cultural values of Belizeans, including Belize's indigenous peoples; 
which preserve the right of the individual to the ownership of private property and the right to operate private 
businesses; which prohibit the exploitation of man by man or by the state; which ensure a just system of social security 
and welfare; which protect the environment; which promote international peace, security and co-operation among nations, 
the establishment of a just and equitable international economic and social order in the world with respect for 
international law and treaty obligations in the dealings among nations; 

(f) desire that their society shall reflect and enjoy the above mentioned principles, beliefs and needs and that their 
Constitution should therefore enshrine and make provisions for ensuring the achievement of the same in Belize; 

NOW, THEREFORE, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Belize: 

PART I 

The State and The Constitution 

1.- (1) Belize shall be a sovereign democratic State of The State. 

Central America in the Caribbean region. 

(2) Belize comprises the land and sea areas defined in Schedule 1 to this Constitution, which immediately before 
Independence Day constituted the colony of Belize. 

2. This Constitution is the supreme law of Belize and if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution that other 
law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void. 

PART II 

Protection of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms 

3. Whereas every person in Belize is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, 
the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the 
rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely- 

(a) life, liberty, security of the person, and the protection ofthe law; 

Constitution is supreme law. 

Fundamental rights and freedoms. 

Protection of right to life. 

(b) freedom of conscience, of expression and of assembly and association; 

(c) protection for his family life, his personal privacy, the privacy of his home and other property andrecognitionofhis 
human dignity; and 

(d) protection from arbitrary deprivation of property, 

the provisions ofthis Part shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subj 
ect to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that 
the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any person does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the 
public interest. 

4.- (1) A person shall not be deprived of his life intentionally save in execution of the sentence of a court in respect 
of a criminal offence under any law of which he has been convicted. 

(2) A person shall not be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contravention of this section if he dies as the 
result of the use, to such extent and in such circumstances as are permitted by law, of such force as is reasonably 
justifiable 

(a) for the defence of any person from violence or for the defence of property; 

(b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully detained; 

(c) for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrection or mutiny; or 

(d) in order to prevent the commission by that person of a criminal offence, 

or ifhe dies as the result of a lawful act of war. 

5.- (1) A person shall not be deprived of his personal liberty save as may be authorised by law in any of the following 
cases, that is to say: - 

(a) in consequence of his unfitness to plead to a criminal charge or in execution ofthe sentence or order of a court, 
whether established for Belize or some other country, in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been convicted; 

(b) in execution of the order of the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal punishing him for contempt of the Supreme Court 
or the Court of Appeal or of another court or tribunal; 

(c) in execution of the order of a court made to secure the fulfilment of any obligation imposed on him by law; 

(d) for the purpose ofbringing him before a court in execution of the order of a court; 

(e) upon a reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or being about to commit, a criminal offence under any law; 

(f) under the order of a court or with the consent of his parent or guardian, for his education or welfare during any 
period ending not later than the date when he attains the age of eighteen years; 

Protection of rights to personal liberty. 

(g) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an infectious or contagious disease; 

(h) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of unsound mind, addicted to drugs or alcohol, or a 
vagrant, for the purpose of his care or treatment or the protection ofthe community; 

(i) for the purpose of preventing his unlawful entry into Belize, or for the purpose of effecting his expulsion, 
extradition or other lawful removal from Belize or for the purpose of restraining him while he is being conveyed through 
Belize in the course ofhis extradition or removal as a convicted prisoner from one country to another; or 

(j) to such extent as may be necessary in the execution of a lawful order requiring him to remain within a specified area 
within Belize, or prohibiting him from being within such an area, or to such extent as may be reasonably justifiable for 
the taking of proceedings against him with a view to the making of any such order or relating to such an order after it 
has been made, or to such extent as may be reasonably justifiable for restraining him during anyvisitthat he is permitted 
to make to any part of Belize in which, in consequence of any such order, his presence would otherwise be unlawful. 

(2) Any person who is arrested or detained shall be entitled or detention, in a language he understands, of the reasons 
for his arrest or detention; 

(b) to communicate without delay and in private with a legal practitioner of his choice and, in the case of a minor, with 
his parents or guardian, and to have adequate opportunity to give instructions to a legal practitioner ofhis choice; 

(c) to be informed immediately upon his arrest of his rights under paragraph (b) ofthis subsection; and 

(d) to the remedy by way of habeas corpus for determining the validity of his detention. 

(3) Any person who is arrested or detained- 

(a) for the purpose ofbringing him before a court in execution of the order of a court; or 

(b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or being about to commit, a criminal offence under any law, 

and who is not released, shall be brought before a court without undue delay and in any case not later than forty­ eight 
hours after such arrest or detention. 

(4) Where any person is brought before a court in execution of the order of a court in any proceedings or upon suspicion
 of his having committed or being about to commit an offence, he shall not be thereafter further held in custody in 
connection with those proceedings or that offence save upon the order of a court. 

(5) If any person arrested or detained as mentioned in subsection (3) (b) of this section is not tried within a 

Protection of law. 

reasonable time, then without prejudice to any further proceedings that may be brought against him, he shall, unless he 
is released, be entitled to bail on reasonable conditions. 

(6) Any person who is unlawfully arrested or detained by any other person shall be entitled to compensation therefor from 
that other person or from any other person or authority on whose behalf that other person was acting: 

Provided that no person shall be liable for any act done in the performance of a judicial function for which he would not 
be liable apart from this subsection. 

(7) For the purposes of subsection (1) (a) of this section, a person charged before a court with a criminal offence in 
respect of whom a special verdict has been returned that he was guilty of the act or omission charged but was insane when 
he did the act or made the omission shall be regarded as a person who has been convicted of a criminal offence and the 
detention of a person in consequence of such a verdict shall be regarded as detention in execution of the order of a court. 

6.- (1) All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the 
law. 

(2) If any person is charged with a criminal offence, then, unless the charge is withdrawn, the case shall be afforded a 
fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law. 

(3) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence- 

(a) shall be presumed to be innocent until he is proved or has pleaded guilty; 

CAP.4J   Belize Constitution   9   
(b)   shall be informed as soon as reasonably     
  practicable, in a language that he understands,     
  of the nature and particulars of the offence     
  charged;     
(c)   shall be given adequate time and facilities for     
  the preparation of his defence;     
(d)   shall be permitted to defend himself before     
  the court in person or, at his own expense, by     
  a legal practitioner of his own choice;     
(e)   shall be afforded facilities to examine in person     
  or by his legal representative the witnesses     
  called by the prosecution before the court,     
  and to obtain the attendance and carry out the     
  examination of witnesses to testify on his     
  behalfbefore the court on the same conditions     
  as those applying to witnesses called by the     
  prosecution; and     
(f)   shall be permitted to have without payment     
  the assistance of an interpreter if he cannot     
  understand the language used at the trial,     

and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render 
the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial 
to proceed in his absence: 

Provided that the trial may take place in his absence in any case in which it is so provided by a law under which he is 
entitled to adequate notice of the charge and the date, time and place of the trial and to a reasonable opportunity of 
appearing before the court. 

(4) A person shall not be held to be guilty of a criminal offence on account of any act or omission that did not, at the 
time it took place, constitute such an offence, and no penalty shall be imposed for any criminal offence that is severer 
in degree or description than the maximum penalty that might have been imposed for that offence at the time when it was 
committed. 

(5) A person who shows that he has been tried by a competent court for a criminal offence and either convicted or 
acquitted shall not again be tried for that offence or for any other criminal offence of which he could have been 
convicted at the trial for that offence, save upon the order of a superior court in the course of appeal or review 
proceedings relating to the conviction or acquittal. 

(6) A person who is tried for a criminal offence shall not be compelled to give evidence at the trial. 

(7) Any court or other authority prescribed by law for the determination of the existence or extent of any civil right or 
obligation shall be established by law and shall be independent and impartial; and where proceedings for such a 
determination are instituted by any person before such a court or other authority, the case shall be given a fair hearing 
within a reasonable time. 

(8) Except with the agreement of all the parties thereto, all proceedings of every court and proceedings for the 
determination ofthe existence or extent of any civil right or obligation before any other authority, including the 
announcement of the decision of the court or other authority, shall be held in public. 

(9) Nothing in subsection (8) of this section shall prevent the court or other adjudicating authority from excluding from 
the proceedings persons other than the parties thereto and the legal practitioners representing them to such extent as 
the court or other authority 

(a) may by law be empowered to do and may consider necessary or expedient in circumstances where publicity would prejudice 
the interests of justice or in interlocutory proceedings or in the interests of public morality, the welfare of persons 
under the age of eighteen years or the protection of the private lives of persons concerned in the proceedings; or 

(b) may by law be empowered or required to do in the interests of defence, public safety or public order. 

(10) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of- 

(a) subsection (3) (a) ofthis section to the extent that the law in question imposes upon any person charged with a 
criminal offence the burden of proving particular facts; 

(b) subsection (3) (e) ofthis section to the extent that the law in question imposes reasonable conditions that must be 
satisfied if witnesses called to testify on behalf of an accused person are to be paid their expenses out of public funds; 
or 

(c) subsection (5) of this section to the extent that the law in question authorises a court to try a member of a 
disciplined force for a criminal offence notwithstanding any trial and conviction or acquittal of that member under the 
disciplinary law ofthat force, so, however, that any court so trying such a member and convicting him shall in sentencing 
him to any punishment take into account any punishment awarded him under that disciplinary law. 

(11) In the case of any person who is held in lawful detention the provisions of subsection (2) and paragraphs (d) and (e)
of subsection (3) of this section shall not apply in relation to his trial for a criminal offence under the law regulating 
the discipline of persons held in such detention. 

(12) In this section, "criminal offence" means a criminal offence under a law. 

7. No person shall be subj ected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other treatment. 

8.- (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude. 

(2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour. 

(3) For the purposes of this section, the expression "forced labour" does not include- 

(a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court; 

(b) labour required of any person while he is lawfully detained that, though not required in consequence of the sentence 
or order of a court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or for the maintenance ofthe place at which he is 
detained; 

(c) any labour required of a member of a disciplined force in pursuance of his duties as such or, in the case of a person 
who has conscientious objections to service as a member of a naval, military or air force, any labour that that person is 
required by law to perform in place of such service; or 

(d) any labour required during any period of public emergency or in the event of any accident or natural calamity that 
threatens the life and well-being ofthe community, to the extent that the requiring of such labour is reasonably 
justifiable in the circumstances of any situation arising or existing during that period or as a result of that accident 
or natural calamity, for the purpose of dealing with that situation. 

9.-(1) Except with his own consent, a person shall not be subj ected to the search of his person or his property or the 
entry by others on his premises. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes reasonable provision- 

(a) that is required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, public health, town and 
country planning, the development and utilisation of mineral resources or the development or utilisation of any property 
for a purpose beneficial to the community; 

(b) that is required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; 

(c) that authorises an officer or agent of the Government, a local government authority or a body corporate established by 
law for public purposes to enter on the premises of any person in order to inspect those premises or anything thereon for 
the purpose of any tax, rate or due or in order to carry out work connected with any property that is lawfully on those 
premises and that belongs to the Government or to that authority or body corporate, as the case may be; or 

(d) that authorises, for the purpose of enforcing the judgment or order of the court in any civil proceedings, the search 
of any person or property by order of a court or entry upon any premises by such order. 

10.- (1) A person shall not be deprived of his freedom of movement, that is to say, the right to move freely throughout 
Belize, the right to reside in any part of Belize, the right to enter Belize, the right to leave Belize and immunity from 
expulsion from Belize. 

(2) Any restriction on a person's freedom of movement that is involved in his lawful detention shall not be held to be 
inconsistent with or in contravention of this section. 

(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes reasonable provision- 

(a) for the imposition of restrictions on the movement or residence within Belize of any person or on any person's right 
to leave Belize that are required in the interests of defence, public safety or public order; 

(b) for the imposition of restrictions on the movement or residence within Belize or on the right to leave Belize of 
persons generally or any class of persons in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or 
public health or, in respect of the right to leave Belize, of securing compliance with any international obligation of the 
Government; 

(c) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of a court, on the movement or residence within Belize of any person or 
on any person's right to leave Belize either in consequence of his having been found guilty of a criminal offence under a 
law or for the purpose of ensuring that he appears before a court at a later date for trial of such a criminal offence or 
for proceedings preliminary to trial or for proceedings relating to his extradition or lawful removal from Belize; 

(d) for the imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement of any person who is not a citizen of Belize; 

(e) for the imposition of restrictions on the acquisition or use by any person of land or other property in Belize; 

(f) for the imposition of restrictions on the movement or residence within Belize or on the right to leave Belize of any 
officer in the public service that are required for the proper performance of his functions; 

(g) for the removal of a person from Belize to be tried or punished in some other country for a criminal offence under 
the law of that other country or to undergo imprisonment in some other country in execution of the sentence of a court in 
respect of a criminal offence under a law of which he has been convicted; or 

(h) for the imposition of restrictions on the right of any person to leave Belize that are required in order to secure the 
fulfillment of any obligation imposed on that person by 

(4) If any person whose freedom of movement has been restricted by virtue of such a provision as is referred to in 
subsection (3) (a) of this section so requests at any time during the period of that restriction not earlier than 
twenty-one days after the order was made or three months after he last made such a request, as the case may be, his case 
shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial tribunal presided over by a person appointed by the Chief Justice from 
among persons who are legal practitioners. 

(5) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of subsection (4) ofthis section of the case of any person whose freedom of 
movement has been restricted, the tribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or expediency of the 
continuation of that restriction to the authority by whom it was ordered and, unless it is otherwise provided by law, 
that authority shall be obliged to act III accordance with any such recommendations. 

11.- (1) Except with his own consent, a person shall not be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of conscience, 
including freedom of thought and of religion, freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom, either alone or in 
community with others, and both in public and in private, to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in worship, 
teaching, practice and observance. 

(2) Except with his own consent (or, ifhe is a person under the age of eighteen years, the consent of his parent or 
guardian) a person attending any place of education, detained in any prison or corrective institution or serving in a 
naval, military or air force shall not be required to receive religious instruction or to take part in or attend any 
religious ceremony or observance if that instruction, ceremony or observance relates to a religion which is not his own. 

(3) Every recognised religious community shall be entitled, at its own expense, to establish and maintain places of 
education and to manage any place of education which it maintains; and no such community shall be prevented from providing 
religious instruction for persons ofthat community in the course of any education provided by that community whether or 
not it is in receipt of a government subsidy or other form of financial assistance designed to meet in whole or in part 
the cost of such course of education. 

( 4) A person shall not be compelled to take any oath which is contrary to his religion or belief or to take any oath in a 
manner which is contrary to his religion or belief. 

(5) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision which is reasonably required- 

(a) in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; 

(b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons, including the right to observe and practise 
any religion without the unsolicited intervention of members of any other religion; or 

(c) for the purpose of regulating educational institutions in the interest ofthe persons who receive or may receive 
instruction in them. 

Protection of freedom of expression. 

(6) References in this section to a religion shall be construed as including references to a religious denomination, and 
cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly. 

12.-(1) Except with his own consent, a person shall not be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of expression, 
including freedom to hold opinions without interference, freedom to receive ideas and information without interference, 
freedom to communicate ideas and information without interference (whether the communication be to the public generally or 
to any person or class of persons) and freedom from interference with his correspondence. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes reasonable provision- 

(a) that is required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; 

(b) that is required for the purpose of protecting the reputations, rights and freedoms of other persons or the private 
lives of persons concerned in legal proceedings, preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, 
maintaining the authority and independence of the courts or regulating the administration or the technical operation of 
telephone, telegraphy, posts, wireless broadcasting, television or other means of communication, public exhibitions or 
public entertainments; or 

(c) that imposes restrictions on officers in the public service that are required for the proper performance of their 
functions. 

13.-(1) Except with his own consent, a person shall not be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of assembly and 
association, that is to say, his right to assemble freely and associate with other persons and in particular to form or 
belong to trade unions or other associations for the protection of his interests or to form or belong to political parties 
or other political associations. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes reasonable provision- 

(a) that is required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; 

(b) that is required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; 

(c) that imposes restrictions on officers in the public service that are required for the proper performance oftheir 
functions; or 

(d) that is required to prohibit any association the membership of which is restricted on grounds of race or colour. 

14.-(1) A person shall not be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or 
correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation. The private and family life, the home and the 
personal correspondence of every person shall be respected. 

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision ofthe kind specified in subsection (2) of section 9 
of this Constitution. 

Protection of freedom of assembly and association. 

Protection of right 

of privacy. 

15. -( 1 ) No person shall be denied the opportunity to gain his living by work which he freely chooses or accepts, 
whether by pursuing a profession or occupation or by engaging in a trade or business, or otherwise. 

(2) It shall not be inconsistent with subsection (1) ofthis section to require, as a condition for embarking upon or 
continuing work, the payment of professional fees, trade or business licence fees, or similar charges, or the possession 
of appropriate licences or qualifications. 

(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall beheld to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes reasonable provision- 

(a) that is required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; 

(b) that is required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; or 

(c) for the imposition of restrictions on the rightto work of any person who is not a citizen of Belize. 

16.-(1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (4), (5) and (7) of this section, no law shall make any provision that is 
discriminatory either of itself or in its effect. 

(2) Subj ect to the provisions of subsections (6), (7) and (8) of this section, no person shall be treated in a 
discriminatory manner by any person or authority. 

(3) In this section, the expression "discriminatory" means affording different treatment to different persons attributable 
wholly or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, place of origin, political opinions, colour or creed 
whereby persons of one such description are subjected to disabilities or restrictions to which persons of another such 
description are not made subject or are accorded privileges or advantages which are not accorded to persons of another 
such description. 

(4) Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to any law so far as that law makes provision- 

(a) for the appropriation of public revenues or other public funds; 

(b) with respectto persons who are not citizens of Belize; 

(c) for the application, in the case of persons of any such description as is mentioned in subsection (3) of this section 
(or of persons connected with such persons), of the law with respect to adoption, marriage, divorce, burial, devolution of 
property on death or other like matters which is the personal law of persons ofthat description; or 

(d) whereby persons of any such description as is mentioned in subsection (3) of this section may be subj ected to any 
disability orrestriction or may be accorded any privilege or advantage that, having regard to its nature and to special 
circumstances pertaining to those persons or to persons of any other such description, is reasonably justifiable. 

(5) Nothing contained in any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1) of this 
section to the extent that it makes provision with respect to standards or qualifications (not being standards 

Protection from deprivation of property. 

or qualifications specifically relating to sex, race, place of origin, political opinions, colour or creed) to be required 
of any person who is appointed to or to act in any office or employment. 

(6) Subsection (2) of this section shall not apply to anything which is expressly or by necessary implication authorised 
to be done by any such provision of law as is referred to in subsection (4) or subsection (5) ofthis section. 

(7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention 
of this section to the extent that the law in question makes provision whereby persons of any such description as is 
mentioned in subsection (3) of this section may be subj ected to any restriction on the rights and freedoms guaranteed by 
sections 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of this Constitution, being such a restriction as is authorised by section 9(2), paragraph 
(a), (b) or (h) of section 10(3), section 11(5), section 12(2) or section 13(2), as the case may be. 

(8) Nothing contained in subsection (2) ofthis section shall affect any discretion relating to the institution, conduct or 
discontinuance of civil or criminal proceedings in any court that is vested in any person by or under this Constitution or 
any other law. 

17.-(1) No property of any description shall be compulsorily taken possession of and no interest in or right over property 
of any description shall be compulsorily acquired except by or under a law that- 

(a) prescribes the principles on which and the manner in which reasonable compensation therefor is to be determined and 
given within a reasonable time; and 

(b) secures to any person claiming an interest in or right over the property a right of access to the courts for the 
purpose of- 

(i) establishing his interest or right (if any); 

(ii) determining whether that taking of possession or acquisition was duly carried out for a public purpose in accordance 
with the law authorising the taking of possession or acquisition; 

(iii) determining the amount of the compensation to which he may be entitled; and 

(iv) enforcing his right to any such compensation. 

(2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law by reason only that it provides for the taking possession of any 
property or the acquisition of any interest in or right over property- 

(a) in satisfaction of any tax, rate or due; 

(b) by way of penalty for breach of the law or forfeiture in consequence of a breach of the law; 

(c) by way of taking a sample for the purposes of any law; 

(d) as an incident of any deposit required to be made with the Government of a reasonable number of copies of every book, 
magazine, newspaper or other printed work published in Belize; 

(e) where the property consists of an animal, upon its being found trespassing or straying; 

(f) as an incident of a lease, tenancy, mortgage, charge, bill of sale or any other right or obligation arising under a 
contract; 

(g) by way of requiring persons carrying on business in Belize to deposit money with the Government or an agency of the 
Government for the purpose of controlling credit or investment in Belize; 

(h) by way of the vesting and administration of trust property, enemy property, the property of deceased persons, persons 
of unsound mind or persons adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt or the property of companies or other societies
(whether incorporated or not) in the course of being wound up; 

(i) in the execution of judgments or orders of courts; 

(j) in consequence of any law with respect to the limitation of actions; 

(k) by reason of its being in a dangerous state or injurious to the health of human beings, animals or plants; 

(I) for the purpose of marketing property of that description in the common interests of the various persons otherwise 
entitled to dispose of that property; or 

(m) for so long only as may be necessary for the purpose of an examination, investigation, trial or enquiry or, in the 
case ofland, the carrying out on the land- 

(i) of work of soil conservation or the conservation of other natural resources; or 

(ii) of agricultural development or improvement which the owner or occupier of the land has been required and has without
reasonable and lawful excuse refused or failed to carry out. 

(3) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply to petroleum, minerals and accompanying substances, in whatever physical 
state, located on or under the territory of Belize (whether under public, private or community ownership) or the exclusive 
economic zone of Belize, the entire property in and control over which are exclusively vested, and shall be deemed always 
to have been so vested, in the Government of Belize. 

Provided that nothing in this subsection shall affect the right of the owner of any private land beneath which any 
petroleum deposits are located to receive royalty from the Government, as provided in the Petroleum Act and the 
regulations made thereunder, existing at the commencement of the Belize Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act. 

(4) For the purpose of subsection (3) above, the terms "petroleum" and "minerals" shall have the meanings as are or may 
be ascribed to them by any law. 

18.-(1) In this Part, "period of public emergency" means any period during which - 

(a) Belize is engaged in any war; or 

(b) there is in force a proclamation by the Governor-General declaring that a state of public emergency exists; or 

(c) there is in force a resolution of the National Assembly declaring that democratic institutions in Belize are 
threatened by subversion. 

(2) The Governor-General may, by proclamation which shall be published in the Gazette, declare that a state of public 
emergency exists for the purposes of this Part. 

(3) A proclamation made by the Governor-General under subsection (2) of this section shall not be effective unless it 
contains a declaration that the Governor-General is satisfied- 

(a) that a state of war between Belize and another State is imminent or that a public emergency has arisen as a result of 
the occurrence of any earthquake, hurricane, flood, fire, outbreak of pestilence, outbreak of infectious disease, or other 
similar calamity; or 

(b) that action has been taken or is immediately threatened by any person or body of persons of such a nature and on so 
extensive a scale as to be likely to endanger the public safety or to deprive the community, or any substantial portion of
the community, of supplies or services essential to life. 

(4) A proclamation made under subsection (2) of this section maybe made so as to apply only to such part of Belize as may 
be specified in the proclamation (in this subsection called "the emergency area"), in which case regulations made under 
subsection (9) of this section shall except as otherwise expressly provided in such regulations have effect only in the 
emergency area. 

(5) A proclamation made by the Governor-General for the purposes of and in accordance with this section- 

(a) shall, unless previously revoked, remain in force for a period not exceeding one month; 

(b) may be extended from time to time by a resolution passed by the National Assembly for further periods, not exceeding 
in respect of each such extension a period of twelve months; and 

(c) may be revoked at any time by a resolution of the National Assembly. 

(6) A resolution of the National Assembly passed for the purposes of subsection (1) (c) of this section shall remain in 
force for two months or such shorter period as may be specified therein: 

Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, each extension not 
exceeding two months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension; and any such resolution maybe revoked at any 
time by a further resolution. 

(7) A resolution of the National Assembly for the purposes of subsection (1) (c) of this section, and a resolution of the 
National Assembly extending or revoking any such resolution, shall not be passed unless it is supported by the votes of 
two-thirds of the members of the House of Representatives present and voting. 

(8) Any provision ofthis section that a proclamation or resolution shall lapse or cease to be in force at any particular 
time is without prejudice to the making of a further such proclamation or resolution whether before or after that time. 

(9) During any period of public emergency, the following provisions shall have effect- 

(a) the Governor-General may make such regulations as are necessary or expedient for securing public safety, the defence 
of Belize, the maintenance of public order and the suppression of mutiny, rebellion and riot, and for maintaining supplies 
and services essential to the life ofthe community; 

(b) any such regulations may empower such authorities or persons as may be specified in the regulations to make orders and 
rules for any of the purposes for which such regulations are authorised by this subsection to be made and may contain such 
incidental and supplementary provisions as are necessary or expedient for the purposes ofthe regulations; 

(c) any such regulations or any order or rule made in pursuance of such regulations may amend or suspend the operation of 
any law and shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law; 

(d) in this subsection, "law" does not include this Constitution or any provision thereof or any law that alters this 
Constitution or any provision thereof. 

(10) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law (including any regulations made under subsection (9) of 
this section) shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of section 5, 6, 8,9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, or 
17 of this Constitution to the extent that the law in question makes in relation to any period of public emergency 
provision, or authorises the doing during any such period of anything, that is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances 
of any situation arising or existing during the period for the purpose of dealing with that situation. 

19.-(1) When a person is detained by virtue of a law that authorises the taking during a period of public emergency of 
measures that are reasonably justifiable for the purpose of dealing with the situation that exists in Belize during that 
under emergency period, the following provisions shall apply, that is to say - 

(a) he shall, with reasonable promptitude and in any case not more than seven days after the commencement of his 
detention, be informed in a language that he understands of the grounds upon which he is detained and furnished with a 
written statement in English specifying the particulars ofthose grounds; 

(b) not more than fourteen days after the commencement of his detention, a notification shall be published in the Gazette 
stating that he has been detained and giving particulars of the provision oflaw under which his detention is authorised; 

(c) not more than one month after the commencement of his detention and thereafter during his detention at intervals of 
not more than three months, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law and 
presided over by a person appointed by the Chief Justice from among persons who are legal practitioners; 

(d) he shall be afforded reasonable facilities for private communication and consultation with a legal practitioner of his 
own choice who shall be permitted to make representations to the tribunal appointed for the review of the case of the 
detained person; and 

(e) at the hearing of his case by the tribunal appointed for the review of his case he shall be permitted to appear in 
person or to be represented by a legal practioner of his own choice. 

(2) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of this section of the case of a detained person, the tribunal may make 
recommendations concerning the necessity or expediency of continuing his detention to the authority by which it was 
ordered but, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that authority shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any 
such recommendations. 

(3) Nothing contained in subsection (1) (d) or subsection (1) (e) of this section shall be construed as entitling a person 
to legal representation at public expense. 

20. -( 1 ) If any person alleges that any of the provisions of sections 3 to 19 inclusive of this Constitution has been, 
is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him (or, in the case of a person who is detained, if any other 
person alleges such a contravention in relation to the detained person), then, without prejudice to any other action with 
respect to the same matter which is lawfully available, that person (or that other person) may apply to the Supreme Court 
for redress. 

(2) The Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction- 

(a) to hear and determine any application made by any person in pursuance of subsection (1) ofthis section; and 

(b) to determine any question arising in the case of any person which is referred to it in pursuance of subsection (3) of 
this section, 

and may make such declarations and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for 
the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 3 to 19 inclusive of this 
Constitution. 

(3) If in any proceedings in any court (other than the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court or a court-martial) any 
question arises as to the contravention of any of the provisions of sections 3 to 19 inclusive of this Constitution, the 
person presiding in that court may, and shall, if any party to the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the 
Supreme Court unless, in his opinion, the raising of this question is merely frivolous or vexatious. 

(4) Any person aggrieved by any determination of the Supreme Court under this section may appeal therefrom to the Court of 
Appeal. 

(5) Where any question is referred to the Supreme Court in pursuance of subsection (3) of this section, the Supreme Court 
shall give its decision upon the question and the court in which the question arose shall dispose of the case in 
accordance with that decision or, if that decision is the subject of an appeal to the Court of Appeal or to the Caribbean 
Court of Justice, in accordance with the decision of the Court of Appeal or, as the case may be, of the Caribbean Court of 
Justice. 

Protection of existing laws. 

Interpretation and savings. 

(6) Notwithstanding the validity of any law under section 9 (2), 10 (3), 11 (5), 12 (2), 13 (2) or 16 (4) (d) ofthis 
Constitution, any act or thing done under the authority of such law shall be unlawful if such act or thing is shown not to 
be reasonably required in the actual circumstances in which it is done. 

(7) The Supreme Court shall have such powers in addition to those conferred by this section as may be conferred on it by 
the National Assembly for the purpose of enabling it more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred on it by this 
section. 

(8) The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court in relation to the 
jurisdiction and powers conferred on it by or under this section (including rules with respect to the time within which 
applications may be brought and references shall be made to the Supreme Court). 

21. Nothing contained in any law in force immediately before Independence Day nor anything done under the authority of any 
such law shall, for a period of five years after Independence Day, be held to be inconsistent with or done in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Part. 

22.-(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires- 

"contravention", in relation to any requirement, includes a failure to comply with that requirement, and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly; 

"court" means any court oflaw having jurisdiction in Belize other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and 
includes Her Majesty in Council and in sections 4 and 8 of this Constitution a court established by a disciplinary law; 

"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force; 

"disciplined force" means- 

(a) a naval, military or air force; 

(b) the Belize Police Department; 

(c) 

. . 

a pnson service; or 

(d) 

any such other force or service as may be prescribed by the National Assembly; 

"legal practitioner" means a person admitted and enrolled as an attorney-at-law under the laws of Belize; 

"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that 
force, is subject to that discipline. 

(2) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force of Belize, nothing contained in or done under the 
authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Part other than sections 4, 7 and 8 of this Constitution. 

(3) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force of a country other than Belize that is lawfully 
present in Belize, nothing contained or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be 
inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the provisions of this Part. 

PART III 

Citizenship 

23. -( 1 ) Every person born in Belize, immediately before Independence Day, shall become a citizen of Belize on 
Independence Day. 

(2) Every person who, immediately before Independence Day, is a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies- 

(a) having become such a citizen under the British Nationality Act 1948 by virtue of his having been naturalised in Belize 
as a British subj ect before that Act came into force; or 

(b) having while resident in Belize become such a citizen by virtue of his having been naturalised or registered under 
that Act, shall become a citizen of Belize on Independence Day. 

(3) Every person born outside Belize, before Independence Day, shall become a citizen of Belize on Independence Day if his 
father or mother becomes, or would but for his death or the renunciation of his citizenship have become, a citizen of 
Belize by virtue of subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 

(4) Every person born outside Belize before Independence Day shall become a citizen of Belize on Independence Day if one 
of his grandparents becomes, or would but for his death or renunciation of his citizenship have become, a citizen of 
Belize by virtue of subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 

(5) Every woman shall become a citizen of Belize on Independence Day if immediately before Independence Day, she is 
married to a person who becomes or, but for his death or the renunciation of his citizenship, would have become a citizen 
of Belize by virtue of subsection(l), (2), (3) or (4) of this section. 

(6) In this section, "the British Nationality Act 1948" includes any Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom amending 
that Act. 

24. Every person born in Belize on or after Independence Day shall become a citizen of Belize at the date of his birth: 

Provided that a person shall not become a citizen of Belize by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth- 

(a) neither of his parents is a citizen of Belize and his father or mother possesses such immunity from suit and legal 
process as is accorded to the envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited to Belize; or 

(b) his father or mother is a citizen of a country with which Belize is at war and the birth occurs in a place then under 
occupation by that country. 

25. A person born outside Belize on or after Independence Day shall become a citizen of Belize at the date of his birth 
if, at that date, his father or mother is a citizen of Belize. 

26.-(1) The following persons may, upon making application at any time after Independence Day, be registered as citizens 
of Belize - 

(a) any person who is married to a citizen of Belize; 

(b) any person who has been resident continuously in Belize for a period of five years immediately before the date of his 
application. 

(2) The National Assembly shall prescribe by law the procedure for making and determining applications, and the conditions 
to be fulfilled by persons making applications, for registration under this section. 

(3) A person registered as a citizen of Belize under this section shall become a citizen of Belize on the date on which he 
is so registered. 

27. A citizen of Belize by birth or descent who acquires the citizenship of any other country may, if the laws of the 
other country so permit and at his option, retain his citizenship of Belize. 

28. -( 1 ) The National Assembly may make provision, not inconsistent with this Part, in respect of citizenship, including 
provision for- 

(a) the acquisition of citizenship of Belize by persons who are not eligible or who are no longer eligible to become 
citizens of Belize under this Part; 

(b) revoking the citizenship of any person referred to in section 26 (1) of this Constitution; 

(c) the renunciation by any person of his citizenship of Belize. 

(2) Paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of this section shall not be construed as allowing the National Assembly to make 
legislation for the acquisition of citizenship of Belize by any person who makes a substantial contribution to the economy 
and/or well-being of Belize or who has rendered distinguished service to Belize. 

29.-(1) For the purposes of this Part, subject to sections 24 and 25, a person born aboard a ship or aircraft registered 
in Belize, or aboard an unregistered ship or aircraft of the Government of Belize, shall not be deemed to have been born 
in Belize. 

Interpretation. 390f2001. 

(2) Any reference in this Part to the national status of the father of a person at the time of that person's birth shall, 
in relation to a person born after the death of his father, be construed as a reference to the national status of the 
father at the time of the father's death; and where that death occurred before Independence Day and the birth occurred on 
or after Independence Day the national status that the father would have had ifhe had died on Independence Day shall be 
deemed to be his national status at the time of his death. 

(3) No person shall be entitled under the provisions 140f1985. of this Part to be a citizen of Belize or be granted 
citizenship of Belize if such person shows any allegiance to or is a citizen of a country which does not recognise the 
independence, sovereignty or territorial integrity of Belize: 
Provided that the Minister may in his discretion grant Belizean citizenship to persons falling under this subsection who 
would otherwise been titled to such citizenship under the provisions of sections 23 and 25 of this Constitution. 

(4) Where a person born outside Belize is entitled to be a citizen of Belize under the provisions of this Part, the right 
to Belizean citizenship shall not be deemed to accrue upon the conditions giving rise to such entitlement arising but the 
citizenship shall be sought for by the person entitled to or on his behalf and obtained by the grant by the Minister of 
proper certification affirming his citizenship. 

(5) Where a person claiming citizenship by birth, descent or registration makes an application or request for the grant 
of citizenship the stay of such person in Belize shall not be considered illegal under the provisions of any law for so 
long and only for so long as such stay is necessary for the disposal of his application. His right of abode, or that of 
his wife or dependents if any under the age of eighteen years, shall not be affected pending the disposal of his 
application. 

PART IV 

The Governor-General 

30. There shall be a Governor-General of Belize who shall be a citizen of Belize appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold 
office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall be Her Majesty's representative in Belize. 

31.-(1) During any period when the office of Governor­ General is vacant or the holder of the office of Governor­ General 
is absent from Belize or is for any other reason unable to perform the functions of his office those functions shall be 
performed by such person as Her Majesty may appoint. 

(2) Any such person as aforesaid shall not continue to perform the functions of the office of Governor-General if the ho 
lder 0 f the 0 ffice of Governor-General or some other person having a prior right to perform the functions of that office 
has notified him that he is about to assume or resume those functions. 

(3) The holder of the office of Governor-General shall not, for the purposes of this section, be regarded as absent from 
Belize or as unable to perform the functions of his office- 

(a) by reason that he is in passage from one part of Belize to another; or 

(b) at any time when there is a subsisting appointment of a deputy under section 33 of this Constitution. 

32. A person appointed to hold the office of Governor­ General shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take 
and subscribe the oath of allegiance and office. 

33.-(1) Whenever the Governor-General- 

(a) has occasion to be absent from the seat of government but not from Belize; 

(b) has occasion to be absent from Belize for a period which he considers, acting in his own deliberate judgment, will be 
of short duration; or 

(c) is suffering from an illness which he considers, acting in his own deliberate judgment, will be of short duration, 

he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Belize to be his deputy during 
such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such ofthe functions ofthe office of Governor­ 
General as may be specified in the instrument by which he is appointed. 

(2) The power and authority ofthe Governor-General shall not be abridged, altered or in any way affected by the 
appointment of a deputy under this section, and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a deputy shall conform 
to and observe all instructions that the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, may from time to time 
address to him: Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions 
shall not be enquired into by any court of law. 

(3) A person appointed as deputy under this section shall hold that appointment for such period as may be specified in the 
instrument by which he is appointed, and his appointment may be revoked at any time by the Governor­ General, acting in 
accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 

34.-(1) In the exercise of his functions the Governor­ General shall act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or a 
Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet except in cases where he is required by this Constitution or 
any other law to act in accordance with the advice of, or after consultation with, any person or authority other than the 
Cabinet or in his own deliberate judgment. 

(2) Any reference in this Constitution to the functions of the Governor-General shall be construed as a reference to his 
powers and duties in the exercise of the executive authority of Belize and to any other powers and duties conferred or 
imposed on him as Governor-General by or under this Constitution or any other law. 

(3) Where by this Constitution the Governor-General is required to perform any function after consultation with any person 
or authority he shall not be obliged to exercise that function in accordance with the advice of that person or authority. 

(4) Where by this Constitution the Governor-General is required to perform any function in accordance with the advice of, 
or after consultation with, any person or authority, the question whether the Governor-General has so exercised that 
function shall not be enquired into by any court oflaw. 

The Executive 

36.-(1) The executive authority of Belize is vested in Her Majesty. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive authority of Belize may be exercised on behalf of Her 
Majesty by the Governor-General either directly or through officers subordinate to him. 

(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent the National Assembly from conferring functions on persons or authorities other 
than the Governor-General. 

37.-(1) There shall be a Prime Minister of Belize who shall be appointed by the Governor-General. 

(2) Whenever the Governor-General has occasion to appoint a Prime Minister he shall appoint a member of the House of 
Representatives who is the leader of the political party which commands the support of the majority of the members of that 
House; and ifno political party has an overall majority, he shall appoint a member ofthat House who appears to him likely 
to command the support of the majority of the members of that House. 

Provided that no person shall be appointed as a Prime Minister who has previously held the office of the Prime Minister 
for three parliamentary terms, either consecutively or in the aggregate; and for this purpose, the expression 
"parliamentary term" shall mean the period commencing on the date of the first sitting of the National Assembly after a 
general election and expiring at the date ofthe next ensuing dissolution of the National Assembly. 

(3) If occasion arises for making an appointment to the office of Prime Minister while the National Assembly is dissolved, 
then, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, a person who was a member of the House of 
Representatives immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as Prime Minister. 

(4) The Governor-General shall remove the Prime Minister from office if a resolution of no confidence in the Government is 
passed by the House of Representatives and the Prime Minister does not within seven days either resign from his office or 
advise the Governor-General to dissolve the National Assembly. 

(5) The office of Prime Minister shall also become 

vacant- 

(a) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the House of Representatives otherwise than by reason ofthe 
dissolution of the National Assembly; 

(b) if, by virtue of section 59(3) of this Constitution, he is required to cease to perform his functions as a member of
the House; or 

(c) if he is informed by the Governor-General that the Governor-General is, in accordance with subsection (2) or (3) of 
this section, about to reappoint him as Prime Minister or to appoint another person as Prime Minister. 

(6) In exercise of the powers conferred on him by this section, the Governor-General shall act in his own deliberate 
judgment. 

38. The Governor-General shall, acting in accordance with the advice ofthe Prime Minister, designate a Minister as Deputy 
Prime Minister to whom the Prime Minister may from time to time depute such of his functions as he may specify. 

39.-(1) Whenever the Prime Minister is absent from Belize or is by reason of illness unable to perform the functions 
conferred on him in accordance with this Constitution, those functions (other than the functions conferred by this section)
shall be performed- 

(a) by the Deputy Prime Minister; or 

(b) in the absence of the Deputy Prime Minister or ifhe too is likewise unable to perform those functions, by such other 
Minister as the Governor-General may authorise for that purpose. 

(2) The Deputy Prime Minister shall cease to perform the functions of the Prime Minister when he is informed by the 
Governor-General that the Prime Minister is about to resume those functions. 

(3) A Minister authorised to perform the functions of the Prime Minister under subsection (1) (b) ofthis section shall 
cease to perform those functions when he is informed by the Governor-General that the Deputy Prime Minister is about to 
assume, or that the Prime Minister is about to resume, those functions. 

(4) The powers of the Governor-General under this section shall be exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the 
Prime Minister: Provided that ifthe Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is 
impracticable to obtain the advice ofthe Prime Minister owing to the absence or illness of the Prime Minister he may 
exercise those powers- 

(a) in accordance with the advice of the Deputy Prime Minister; or 

(b) if he likewise considers it impracticable to obtain the advice of the Deputy Prime Minister, in his own deliberate 
judgment. 

40.-(1) There shall be, in addition to the office of Prime Minister, such other offices of Minister of the Government as 
may be established by the National Assembly or, subject to the provisions of any law enacted by the National Assembly, by 
the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 

(2) Appointments to the office of Minister shall be made by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of 
the Prime Minister, from among members of the House of Representatives and of the Senate: 

Provided that persons holding the office of Speaker of the House of Representatives or President ofthe Senate may not be 
appointed to the office of Minister: 

Provided further that the Cabinet shall be comprised of - 

(a) not more than two-thirds of the elected Members of the party that obtains the majority seats in the House of 
Representatives following the holding of a general election; and 

(b) not more than four Senators. 

Provided further that, subject to section 42(3) of this Constitution, a national of Belize may be appointed as Attorney 
General whether or not that person is a member of either House of the National Assembly. 

(3) If occasion arises for making an appointment to the office of Minister while the National Assembly is dissolved, then, 
notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, a person who was a member ofthe House of Representatives 
or ofthe Senate immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as Minister. 

(4) The office of any Minister shall become vacant- 

(a) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member ofthe House of Representatives or of the Senate otherwise than by 
reason of the dissolution ofthe National Assembly; 

(b) if, by virtue of section 59 (3) or 64 (3) of this Constitution, he is required to cease to perform his functions as a 
member of the House of Representatives or ofthe Senate; 

(c) if the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, so directs; 

(d) if the Prime Minister resigns from office within seven days after a resolution of no confidence in the Government has 
been passed by the House of Representatives or is removed from office under section 37 (4) of this Constitution; or 

(e) on the appointment of any person to the office of Prime Minister. 

Attorney­ General. 

(4A) Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (4) ofthis section shall not apply to the office ofthe Attorney General where 
the Attorney General is appointed from outside the membership of either House of the National Assembly. 

(5) In this section, "Minister" means a Minister of the Government other than the Prime Minister. 

41.-(1) The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may, by directions in writing, 
assign to the Prime Minister or any other Minister responsibility for any business of the Government, including the 
administration of any department of Government: 

Provided that responsibility for finance shall be assigned to a Minister who is a member of the House of Representatives. 

(2) Where a Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of government, he shall exercise general 
direction and control over that department of government. 

42.-(1) The Attorney-General shall be the principal legal adviser to the Government. 

(2) The office of Attorney-General shall be the office of a Minister, with responsibility for the administration of legal 
affairs in Belize. 

(3) No person shall be qualified to hold the office of Attorney-General unless he is a person who has for at least five 
years been entitled to practise as an advocate in a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in 
some part ofthe Commonwealth or in the Republic ofIreland or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court. 
(4) If a person holding the office of Attorney-General is for any reason unable to perform the functions conferred on 
him by or under any law, those functions may be performed by such other person, being a person qualified as aforesaid 
(whether or not that person is a member of either House ofthe National Assembly), as the Governor-General, acting in 
accordance with the advice ofthe Prime Minister, may direct. 

(5) Legal proceedings for or against the State shall be taken, in the case of civil proceedings, in the name of the 
Attorney-General and, in the case of criminal proceedings, in the name of the Crown. 

43.-( 1) Whenever a Minister other than the Prime Minister is absent from Belize or is within Belize but by leave of the 
Governor-General is not performing the functions of his office or by reason of illness is unable to perform those 
functions, the Governor-General may authorize some other Minister to perform those functions or may appoint a member of 
the House of Representatives or of the Senate to be a temporary Minister in order to perform those functions; and that 
Minister may perform those functions until his authority or, as the case may be, his appointment is revoked by the 
Governor-General or he vacates office as a Minister under section 40(4) of this Constitution. 

(2) The powers of the Governor-General under this section shall be exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the 
Prime Minister: 

Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is impracticable to 
obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers in accordance with 
the advice of the Deputy Prime Minister. 

Performance of functions of Ministers during absence or illness. 

44.-(1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers for Belize which shall consist of the Prime Minister and the other 
Ministers: 

Provided that a Minister of State appointed under section 45 shall not be a member of Cabinet but may attend Cabinet 
meetings upon the invitation of the Prime Minister. 

(2) The Cabinet shall be the principal executive instrument of policy with general direction and control of the 
Government and shall be collectively responsible to the National Assembly for any advice given to the Governor­ General 
by or under the general authority of the Cabinet and for all things done by or under the authority of any Minister in the 
execution of his office. 

(3) The provisions of subsection (2) of this section shall not apply in relation to - 

(a) the appointment and removal from office of Ministers and Ministers of State, the assignment of responsibility to any 
Minister under section 41 ofthis Constitution, or the authorisation of another Minister to perform the functions of the 
Prime Minister during absence or illness; or 

(b) the dissolution of the National Assembly. 

(4) Whenever practicable the Prime Minister shall attend and preside at all Cabinet meetings; at a meeting of the Cabinet 
from which the Prime Minister is absent, any other Minister appointed by him for the purpose shall preside. 

45.-(1) The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice ofthe Prime Minister, may appoint Ministers of State 
from among the members of the House of Representatives or of the Senate to assist Ministers in the performance of their 
duties. 

(2) The office of a Minister of State shall become   260f1998.   
vacant-       
(a)   if the holder of the office ceases to be a     
  member ofthe House of Representatives or of     
  the Senate otherwise than by reason of the     
  dissolution ofthe National Assembly;     
(b)   if, by virtue of section 59 (3) or 64 (3) of this     
  Constitution, he is required to cease to perform     
  his functions as a member of the House of     
  Representatives or ofthe Senate;     
(c)   if the Governor -General, acting in accordance     
  with the advice of the Prime Minister, so     
  directs;     
(d)   if the Prime Minister resigns from office within     
  seven days after a resolution of no confidence     
  in the Government has been passed by the     
  House of Representatives or is removed from     
  office under section 37 (4) of this Constitution;     
  or     
(e)   on the appointment of any person to the office     
  of Prime Minister.     

46. A Minister or a Minister of State shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the 
oath of allegiance and office. 

Oath to be taken by Minister, etc. 260f1988. 

47.-(1) There shall (except at times when there are no members of the House of Representatives who do not support the 
Government) be a Leader of the Opposition who shall be appointed by the Governor-General. 

Leader of the Opposition. 

(2) Whenever there is occasion for the appointment of a Leader of the Opposition the Governor-General shall appoint the 
member of the House of Representatives who appears to him most likely to command the support of a majority of the members 
of the House who do not support the Government; or, if no member of the House appears to him to command such support, the 
member of the House who appears to him to command the support of the largest single group of members of the House who do 
not support the Government. 

(3) If occasion arises to appoint a Leader of the Opposition during the period between a dissolution of the National 
Assembly and the day on which the ensuing election of members of the House of Representatives is held, an appointment may 
be made as if the National Assembly had not been dissolved. 

(4) The office of Leader of the Opposition shall become vacant- 

(a) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the House of Representatives otherwise than by reason of a 
dissolution of the National Assembly; 

(b) ifbyvirtue of section 59 (3) of this Constitution, he is required to cease to perform his functions as a member ofthe 
House; or 

(c) ifhe is removed from office by the Governor­ General under the provisions of subsection (5) ofthis section. 

(5) If it appears to the Governor-General that the Leader of the Opposition is no longer able to command the support of a 
majority of the members of the House of Representatives who do not support the Government or(if no member of the House 
appears to him to be able to command such support) the support of the largest single group of members of the House who do 
not support the Government, he shall remove the Leader ofthe Opposition from office. 

(6) Subject to the provisions of section 61 (3) (b) of this Constitution, during any period in which there is a vacancy 
in the office of Leader of the Opposition, the provisions of this Constitution containing the requirement that action 
shall be taken in accordance with the advice of, or after consultation with, or with the concurrence of, the Leader of the 
Opposition shall have effect as if there were no such requirement. 

(7) The powers of the Governor-General under this section shall be exercised by him in his own deliberate judgment. 

48. Subject to the direction and control of the Minister pursuant to section 41(2) of this Constitution, every department 
of government shall be under the supervision of a public officer whose office is referred to in this Constitution as the 
office of a Chief Executive Officer: 

Provided that two or more government departments may be placed under the supervision of one Chief Executive Officer. 

49.-(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet whose office shall be a public office. 

(2) The Secretary to the Cabinet, who shall have charge of the Cabinet Office, shall be responsible, in accordance with 
such instructions as may be given to him by the Prime Minister, for arranging the business for, and keeping the minutes of,
the Cabinet and for conveying the decisions ofthe Cabinet to the appropriate person or authority 

Chief Executive Office. 

Secretary to the Cabinet. 

Control of public prosecutions. 

20(2001. 

and shall have such other functions as the Prime Minister may direct. 

50.-(1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions whose office shall be a public office. 

(2) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have power with good and sufficient reason- 

(a) to institute, and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court of law (other than a 
court-martial) in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by that person; 

(b) to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings that have been instituted or undertaken by any other person or 
authority; and 

(c) to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered any such criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by 
himself or any other person or authority. 

(3) The powers ofthe Director of Public Prosecutions under subsection (2) of this section may be exercised by him in 
person or through other persons acting under and in accordance with his general or special instructions. 

(4) The powers conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by paragraphs (b) and (c) of subsection (2) of this 
section shall be vested in him to the exclusion of any other person or authority: 

Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall 
prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the 
court. 

(5) For the purposes of this section, any appeal from ajudgment in criminal proceedings before any court, or any case 
stated or question of law reserved for the purpose of any such proceedings, to any other court (including Her Majesty in 
Council) shall be deemed to be part of those proceedings: 

Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2) (c) of this section shall not 
be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question 
of law reserved at the instance of such a person. 

(6) Subject to the powers of the Attorney-General under section 42(2) of this Constitution, in the exercise of the powers 
vested in him by subsection (2) of this section the Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be subject to the direction 
or control of any other person or authority. 

51. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any other law, the Governor-General may constitute offices for 
Belize, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment. 

52.-(1) The Governor-General may- 

(a) grant a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions, to any person convicted of any offence; 

(b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed 
on that person for any offence; 

(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on any person for any offence; or 

(d) remit the whole or any part of any punishment imposed on any person for any offence or of any penalty or forfeiture 
otherwise due to the Crown on account of any offence. 

(2) The powers of the Governor-General under subsection (1) of this section shall be exercised by him in accordance with 
the advice ofthe Belize Advisory Council. 

53. Where any person has been sentenced to death (otherwise than by a court-martial) for an offence, the Attorney-General 
shall cause a written report of the case from the trial judge (or the Chief Justice, if a report from the trial judge 
cannot be obtained), together with such other information derived from the record ofthe case or elsewhere as he may 
require, to be taken into consideration at a meeting of the Belize Advisory Council, so that the Council may advise the 
Governor-General whether to exercise any of his powers under section 52 (1) of this Constitution. 

54.-(1) There shall be a Belize Advisory Council (hereinafter referred to as "the Council") which shall consist of the 
members specified in subsection (2). 

(2) The Council shall consist of:- 

(a) two senior members, who shall be persons of integrity and high national standing, appointed by the Governor-General, 
acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister; and 

(b) two senior members, who shall be persons of integrity and high national standing, appointed by the Governor-General, 
acting in accordance with the advice of the Leader of the Opposition; and 

(c) three other members, who sha11 be persons of integrity and high national standing, appointed by the Governor-General, 
acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(3) Subject to the proviso to this subsection, a senior 390f2001. member of the Council shall hold office until he reaches 
the age of seventy-five years, unless he earlier resigns his 

office by writing under his own hand addressed to the Governor-General, or if by a resolution of the House of 
Representatives supported by two-thirds of the members of that House he is declared unable to discharge the functions of 
his office by reason of persistent absence or infirmity 

of body or mind, or to be in breach of the provisions of 

section 121 of this Constitution: 

Provided that:- 

(a) a senior member who has attained the age of seventy-five years may be appointed to continue in office until he attains 
any later age as may be specified in his instrument of appointment; 

(b) any person of integrity and high national standing who at the commencement of this section is at least seventy-five 
years of age may be appointed a senior member and may continue in office until he attains any later age as may be 
specified in his instrument of appointment. 

(4) A member ofthe Council referred to in subsection (2)(c) of this section shall hold office for three years from the 
date of his appointment, unless he earlier resigns his office by writing under his own hand addressed to the 
Governor-General, or if by resolution of the House of Representatives supported by two-thirds of the members of that 
House he is declared unable to discharge the functions of his office by reason of persistent absence or infirmity of body 
or mind, or to be in breach of the provisions of section 121 of this Constitution. 

(5) No person shall be appointed a member or senior member of the Council unless he is a citizen of Belize, except that a 
member of the Council who holds or has held office as a judge of a superior court of record need not be a citizen of 
Belize if he is a citizen of a Commonwealth country. 

(6) The Governor-General shall in each year appoint a different senior member of the Council to be Chairman of the Council, 
and in making such appointment the Governor-General shall ensure that in any period of four years, no senior member shall 
be Chairman twice. 

(7) A member of the Council, including a senior member, shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken 
and subscribed the oath or affirmation of allegiance and office set out in Schedule 3 ofthis Constitution. 

(8) The functions of the Council shall be: 

(a) to advise the Governor-General in the exercise of his powers under section 52 of this Constitution; 

(b) to perform such other tasks and duties as are conferred or imposed on it by this Constitution or any other law. 

(9) In the exercise of its functions, the Council shall 390f2001. not be subj ect to the direction or control of any other 
person or authority. 

(10) The Chairman or in his absence, a senior member 39 of 2001. appointed for that purpose by the Governor-General, shall 
convene all meetings of the Council for consideration of matters which in accordance with this Constitution or any other 
law the Council is called upon to consider. 

(11) The Chairman or in his absence, the senior 390f2001. member appointed for that purpose by the Governor-General under 
subsection (10), shall preside at all meetings of the council. 

(12) Notwithstanding subsections (10) and (11), in 390f2001. any case where the Council is convened to discharge its 
duties under section 88, 98,102, 105, 108 or 109 of this Constitution, or where the Council is convened to hear an appeal 
from an officer to whom section 106, 107, 110D or 11 OF of this Constitution applies, the Chairman shall preside at that 
meeting. 

(13) Where the Council is convened to remove the 390f2001. 

Chairman, some other person who holds or has held office as a Judge of a superior court of record shall be appointed by 
the Governor-General on the advice ofthe Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition to act 
as Chairman for that purpose. 

(14) At all meetings of the Council:- 390f2001. 

(a) the quorum shall be five members; 

(b) decisions shall be by a majority of the votes of those members of the Council present and voting; and 

(c) in the event that votes are equally divided on any matter, the Chairman or senior member presiding shall have a second 
vote in addition to his original vote. 

(15) The Council may make regulations for regulating and facilitating the performance of its function under this 
Constitution or any other law. 

(16) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Council may regulate its own procedure. 

(17) The Council may, subject to the provisions of this section and to its rules of procedure, act notwithstanding any 
vacancy in its membership or the absence of any member. 

(18) The question whether or not the Council has validly performed any functions conferred or imposed on it by this 
Constitution or any other law shall not be enquired into in any court of law. 

(19) Within four months after the end of each year, the Council shall prepare and submit to the Prime Minister, a report 
dealing generally with its proceedings and activities in the preceding year, and the Prime Minister shall, within three 
months of receiving the report, cause a copy of the report to be tabled in the National Assembly. 

(20) The Council which was in existence prior to the 15th day of January, 2002:- 

(a) shall stand dissolved by the 31 st December, 2001; 

(b) may be allowed by the Governor-General, acting on the advice of the Prime Minister, notwithstanding paragraph (a) of 
this subsection, to continue in office after 31 st December, 2001, only for the purpose of enabling it to discharge its 
duties or perform its function in relation to matters that were pending or proceedings that were commenced before it, 
prior to the 15th day of January, 2002. 

PART VI 

The Legislature 

390f2001. S.I. No.1 of 2002. 

55. There shall be in and for Belize a Legislature which Establishment shall consist of aN ational Assembly comprising two 
Houses, of Legislature. that is to say, a House of Representatives and a Senate. 

The House of Representatives 

56.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the House of Representatives shall consist ofthirty-one members who 
shall be elected in the manner provided by law. 

(2) If any person who is not a member of the House of Representatives is elected to be Speaker of the House he shall, by 
virtue of holding the office of Speaker, be a member ofthe House in addition to the thirty-one members aforesaid. 

(3) The National Assembly, in accordance with the provisions of section 90 of this Constitution, may by law increase the 
number of members of the House of Representatives. 

57. Subject to the provisions of section 58 of this Constitution, a person for election shall be qualified to be elected 
as a member of the House of Representatives if, and shall not be qualified to be so elected unless, he- 

(a) is a citizen of Belize of the age of eighteen years or upwards; and 

(b) has resided in Belize for a period of at least one year immediately before the date of his nomination for election. 

58.-(1) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House of Representatives who- 

(a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgement of allegiance, obedience or adherence to a foreign power or 
State; 

(b) is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in any part of
the Commonwealth; 

(c) is a person certified to be insane or otherwise adjudged to be of unsound mind under any law; 

(d) is under sentence of death imposed on him by a court in any part of the Commonwealth or is serving a sentence of 
imprisonment (by whatever name called) exceeding twelve months imposed on him by such a court or substituted by competent 
authority for some other sentence imposed on him by such a court, or is under such a sentence of imprisonment the 
execution of which has been suspended; 

(e) is disqualified for membership of the House of Representatives by any law by reason of his holding, or acting in, any 
office the functions of which involve 

(i) any responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election; or 

(ii) any responsibility for the compilation or revision of any electoral register; 

(f) is disqualified for membership of the House of Representatives by virtue of any law by reason of his having been 
convicted of any offence relating to elections; 

(g) is disqualified for membership of the House of Representatives under any law by virtue of 

(i) his holding or acting in any office or appointment specified (either individually or by reference to a class of office 
or appointment) by such law; 

(ii) his belonging to any of the armed forces of Belize or to any class of person that is comprised in any such force; or 

(iii) his belonging to any police force or to any class of persons that is comprised in any such force; or 

(h) is a party to, or a partner in a firm or a director or manager of a company which is a party to, any contract with the 
Government for or on account of the public service and has not, within one month before the day of election, declared 
publicly and in a newspaper circulating in the electoral division for which he is a candidate a notice setting out the 
nature ofthe contract and his interest, or the interest of any such firm or company therein: 

Tenure of office of members. 

Provided that if it appears to the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, that it is proper so to do, he 
may by order direct that any such disqualification shall be disregarded for the purposes of this section, but no such 
order shall be made if proceedings have been commenced calling in question the right of that member to be a member of the 
House of Representatives on the ground that he is disqualified under this paragraph. 

(2) For the purposes of paragraph (d) of subsection (1) of this section- 

(a) two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served consecutively shall be regarded as separate 
sentences if none of those sentences exceeds twelve months, but if anyone of such sentences exceeds that term they shall 
be regarded as one sentence; and 

(b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment imposed as an alternative to or in default of the payment of a 
fine. 

(3) Where a by-election is held to fill the vacancy caused by the recall of a member of the House of Representatives under 
any law providing for the recall of elected representatives, the member so recalled or who resigned in consequence of a
 petition for his recall shall be ineligible to stand as a candidate for the seat to be filled in such by-election. 

59.-(1) Every member of the House of Representatives shall vacate his seat in the House at the next dissolution of the 
National Assembly after his election. 

(2) A member of the House of Representatives shall also vacate his seat in the House - 

(a) ifhe is absent from the sittings of the House for such period and in such circumstances as may be prescribed in the 
Standing Orders of the House; 

(b) ifhe ceases to be a citizen of Belize; 

(c) subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of the section, if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member 
of the House of Representatives, would cause him to be disqualified for election thereto by virtue of section 58 (1) of 
this Constitution; 

(d) ifhe shall become a party to any contract with the government for or on account of the public service, or if any firm 
in which he is a partner or any company of which he is a director or manager shall become a party to any such contract, or 
if he shall become a partner in a firm or a director or manager of a company which is a party to any such contract: 

Provided that if in the circumstances it shall appear to them just so to do, the House of Representatives by resolution 
may exempt any member thereof from vacating his seat under the provisions of this paragraph if such member shall, before 
becoming a party to such contract as aforesaid or before or as soon as practicable after becoming otherwise interested in 
such contract (whether as partner in a firm or director or manager of a company), disclose to the House the nature of such 
contract and his interest or the interest of any such firm or company therein; 

(e) if, having been a candidate of a political party 2 of 2001. and elected to the House of Representatives 

as a candidate of that political party, he resigns 

from that political party or crosses the floor; or 

(j) ifhe is recalled as a member ofthe House of Representatives under any law providing for the recall of elected 
representatives before the expiry of their normal term of office. 

(3) (a) If circumstances such as are referred to in paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of this section arise because any 
member of the House of Representatives is under sentence of death or imprisonment, or adjudged to be insane or otherwise 
of unsound mind, or declared bankrupt and undischarged, or convicted of an offence relating to elections, and ifit is open 
to the member to appeal against the decision (either with the leave of a court or other authority or without such leave), 
he shall forthwith cease to perform his functions as a member of the House but, subject to the provisions of this 
subsection, he shall not vacate his seat until the expiration of a period ofthirty days thereafter: 

Provided that the Speaker may from time to time extend that period for further periods ofthirty days to enable the member 
to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and 
fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, ofthe House. 

(b) If, on the determination of any appeal, such circumstances continue to exist and no further appeal is open to the 
member, or if, by reason of the expiration of any period for entering an appeal or notice thereof or the refusal ofleave 
to appeal or for any other reason, it ceases to be open to the member to appeal, he shall forthwith vacate his seat. 

(c) If at anytime before the member of the House vacates his seat such circumstances as aforesaid cease to exist, his 
seat shall not become vacant on the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph (a) ofthis subsection and he may 
resume the performance of his functions as a member ofthe House. 

59A.(1) Where a person resigns from being a member of a political party under the circumstances referred to in section 
59(2)( e), that person shall, within seven days of so resigning, inform the leader in the House of Representatives of the 
political party as a candidate of which that person was elected, and the leader of the political party shall so notify the 
Speaker in writing of such resignation. 

(2) Where a person crosses the floor under the circumstances referred to in section 59(2)( e), the leader in the House of 
Representatives of the political party as a candidate of which that person was elected shall, within seven days of such 
crossing of the floor, so notify the Speaker in writing of such member having crossed the floor. 

(3) Upon receipt of the written notice referred to in subsection (1) or (2), the Speaker shall, if satisfied that the 
circumstances referred to in section 59(2)(e) exist, make a declaration at the next sitting ofthe House of Representatives 
next after receiving the notice that the member has ceased to be a member of the House of Representatives by reason of 
resignation or crossing the floor, as the case may be. 

(4) Where the person subj ect to disqualification under section59(2)(e) is the Speaker, the leader ofthe political party 

Procedure where a member vacates seat due to resignation or crossing the floor. 20£2001. 

in the House of Representatives as a candidate of which the Speaker was elected as a member of the House shall, when 
acting in accordance with subsection (1) or (2), notify a person elected by the House in that behalf, and such person may 
make a declaration in accordance with subsection (3) that the Speaker has ceased to be a member of the House of 
Representatives by reason of resignation or crossing the floor, as the case may be. 

(5) Where a declaration has been made under subsection (3) that a person has ceased to be a member of the House of 
Representatives by reason of resignation or crossing the floor, that person:- 

(a) may, within twenty-one days of the making of the declaration, appeal against the declaration to the Supreme Court, 
whose decision on the matter shall be final; 

(b) shall cease to perform his functions as a member of the House but, subjectto subsection (6), shall not vacate his seat 
until after the determination of his appeal by the Supreme Court. 

(6) If, on the determination of any appeal made under subsection (5)(a), the Supreme Court determines that the person 
resigned from the political party or crossed the floor, as the case may be, or if the period for entering an appeal under 
subsection (5)(a) expires before the person enters an appeal, he shall forthwith vacate his seat. 

(7) Section 59(2)(e) and this section shall apply to all members ofthe House of Representatives who were such members on 
or after the 23rd day of February, 2001. 

60.-(1) When the House of Representatives first meets after any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch of 
any other business it shall elect a person to be Speaker of the House; and, if the office of Speaker falls vacant at any 
time before the next dissolution of the National Assembly, the House shall, as soon as practicable, elect another person 
to that office. 

(2) The Speaker shall be above the age ofthirty years and may be elected either from among the members of the House of 
Representatives who are not Ministers or from among persons who are not members of either House: 

Provided that a person who is not a member of either House shall not be elected as Speaker if- 

(a) he is not a citizen of Belize; or 

(b) he is a person disqualified for election as a member of the House of Representatives by virtue of section 58 (1) of 
this Constitution. 

(3) When the House of Representatives first meets after any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch of any 
other business except the election of the Speaker, the House shall elect a member ofthe House, who is not a Minister, to 
be Deputy Speaker of the House; and if the office of Deputy Speaker falls vacant at any time before the next dissolution 
of the National Assembly, the House shall, as soon as practicable, elect another such member to that office. 

(4) A person shall vacate the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker- 

(a) in the case of a Speaker elected from among members of the House of Representatives or in the case of the Deputy 
Speaker- 

(i) if he ceases to be a member of the House; or 

(ii) ifhe is appointed to be a Minister; 

(b) in the case of a Speaker elected from among persons who are not members of either House- 

(i) upon any dissolution of the National Assembly; 

(ii) ifhe ceases to be a citizen of Belize; or 

(iii) if any circumstances arise which would cause him to be disqualified for election as a member of the House by virtue 
of section 58 (1) ofthis Constitution; 

(c) in the case of the Deputy Speaker, if he is elected to be Speaker. 

(5) (a) If, by virtue of section 59 (3) of this Constitution, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker is required to cease to 
perform his functions as a member of the House of Representatives, he shall also cease to perform his functions as Speaker 
or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, and those functions shall, until he vacates his seat in the House or resumes the 
performance of the functions of his office, be performed- 

(i) in the case of the Speaker, by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is vacant, by such member of the 
House (not being a Minister) as the House may elect for the purpose; 

(ii) in the case of the Deputy Speaker, by such member of the House (not being a Minister) as the House may elect for the 
purpose. 

(b) Ifthe Speaker or Deputy Speakerresumes the performance of his functions as a member of the House, in accordance with
the provisions of section 59(3) of this Constitution, he shall also resume the performance of his functions as Speaker or 
Deputy Speaker, as the case maybe. 

The Senate 

61.-(1) Subjectto subsection (2), the Senate shall consist of thirteen members (in this Constitution referred to as 
"Senators") who shall be appointed by the Governor-General in accordance with the provisions of this section. 

(2) The Senators shall elect a person from outside their membership to be the President of the Senate in accordance with 
section 66. 

(3) The President of the Senate shall not have a casting vote. 

Provided that if the President of the Senate- 

(a) is a Senator, he shall have an original but not a casting vote, and 

(b) is not a Senator, he shall not have a vote, 

when the Senate is deciding on any matter referred to in section 61A (2) (d) of this Constitution. 

(4) Of the thirteen Senators-  

(a) six shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice ofthe Prime Minister; and 

(b) three shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice of the Leader of the Opposition; 
and 

(c) one shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice of the Belize Council of Churches 
and Evangelical Association of Churches; and 

(d) one shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice of the Belize Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry and the Belize Business Bureau; and 

(e) one shall be appointed by the Governor­ General acting in accordance with the advice of the National Trade Union 
Congress and the Civil Society Steering Committee; and 

(j) one shall be appointed by the Governor­ General, acting in accordance with the advice of non-governmental 
organisations. 

(5) Where an organisation referred to in paragraphs (c) to (j) of subsection (4) of this section fails to advise the 
Governor-General, within fourteen days of receiving a written invitation from the Governor-General to give written advice 
to him of its candidate as Senator, as required by that subsection, the Governor-General shall appoint that Senator in 
accordance with the advice of the Belize Advisory Council. 

(6) Notwithstanding sections 64 and 84 of this Constitution, the Senate which was in existence prior to the 

CAP.4J 

Belize Constitution 

71 

15th day of January, 2002, shall stand dissolved from the 15th day of January, 2002. 

(7) When the Senate first meets after the 15th day ofJanuary, 2002, before it proceeds to despatch any business, it shall 
elect a person to be President of the Senate, and another Senator who is not a Minister to be Vice President of the Senate. 

(8) If there is an equality of votes at a meeting to elect a President, the Leader of Government Business in the Senate 
shall have a second vote. 

(9) The Governor-General may make rules governing the nomination of candidates as Senators by the organisations specified 
in paragraphs ( c) to (f) of subsection (4) of this section. 

61A.(1) Without prejudice to any other powers vested in the Senate by this functions of Constitution or any other law, the
Senate shall have the powers and perform the functions set out in the subsection (2). 

(2) The powers and functions ofthe Senate referred to in section (1) are as follows:- 

(a) authorising the ratification (including adhesion or accession) of any treaty by the Government of Belize, including 
any treaty for the settlement of the territorial dispute between Belize and the Republic of Guatemala; 

(b) approving the establishment in Belize of any military base of operations for any foreign military forces; 

(c) approving 1re cgrintnm: of1re Crntta:Icr GemID, 1re Omhrlmm, a rnmh;:r of 1re EIectirns arxl 13outrln1ffi Crn1miml 
arxl a rnmh;:r of 1re Integrity Comrnim1; 

(d) instituting and conducting enqumes and investigations on any matter of public interest or importance, including 
inquiries into mismanagement or corruption by persons in the central government or public statutory bodies; 

(e) receiving, reviewing and reporting on annual reports and other reports of the Auditor General, the Contractor General 
and the Ombudsman and instituting and conducting inquiries, investigations and hearings in relation thereto; 

(j) requiring the attendance before it of the Auditor General, the Contractor General or the Ombudsman generally, in 
relation to the discharge oftheir duties and the execution of their functions; 

(g) requiring the attendance before it of any Chief Executive Officer in a Government Ministry in respect of any matter of
which he has knowledge by virtue of his office, or in respect of anything related to his office and the due execution of 
his duties; and 

(h) requiring the attendance before any Committee of the Senate, of any Minister of Government. 

(3) Where any law, including this Constitution, provides a procedure for making any appointment referred to in subsection 
(2)(c), and such procedure of appointment is inconsistent with the powers of the Senate under this section, then such 
appointment shall only be validly done ifthe prior approval ofthe Senate as required by this section is obtained. 

(4) The Senate shall exercise its powers and perform its functions under this section through a resolution supported by a 
simple majority of its members. 

62. Subject to the provisions of section 63 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator
if, and shall not be qualified to be so appointed unless, he- 

(a) is a citizen of Belize of the age of eighteen years or upwards; and 

(b) has resided in Belize for a period of at least one year immediately before the date of his appointment. 

63.-(1) No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator who- 

(a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgement of allegiance, obedience or adherence to a foreign power or 
State; 

(b) is a member of the House of Representatives; 

(c) is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in any part 
of the Commonwealth; 

(d) is a person certified to be insane or otherwise to be of unsound mind under any law; 

(e) is under sentence of death imposed upon him by a court in any part of the Commonwealth or is serving a sentence of 
imprisonment (by whatever name called) exceeding twelve months imposed on him by such a court or substituted by competent 
authority for some other sentence imposed on him by such a court, or is under such a sentence of imprisonment the 
execution of which has been suspended; 

(f) is disqualified for membership of the House of Representatives by any law by reason of his holding, or acting in, any 
office the functions of which involve 

(i) any responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election; or 

(ii) any responsibility for the compilation or revision of any electoral register; 

(g) is disqualified for membership of the House of Representatives by virtue of any law by reason of his having been 
convicted of any offence relating to elections; 

(h) is disqualified for membership ofthe Senate under any law by virtue of 

(i) his holding or acting in any office or appointment specified (either individually or by reference to a class of office 
or appointment) by such law; 

(ii) his belonging to any of the armed forces of Belize or to any class of person that is comprised in any such force; or 

(iii) his belonging to any police force or to any class of person that is comprised in any such force; or 

(i) is a party to, or a partner in a firm or a director or manager of a company which is a party to, any contract with the 
Government for or on account of the public service, and has not disclosed to the Governor-General the nature of such 
contract and his interest, or the interest of any such firm or company, therein: 

Provided that if it appears to the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, that it is proper so to do, 
he may by order direct that any such disqualification shall be disregarded for the purposes of this section. 

(2) For the purposes of paragraph (e) of subsection (1) of this section- 

(a) two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served consecutively shall be regarded as separate 
sentences if none of those sentences exceeds twelve months, but if anyone of such sentences exceeds that term they shall 
be regarded as one sentence; and 

(b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment imposed as an alternative to or in default of the payment of a 
fine. 

64.-(1) Every Senator shall vacate his seat in the Senate at the next dissolution of the National Assembly after his 
appointment. 

(2) A Senator shall also vacate his seat in the Senate- 

(a) ifhe is absent from the sittings of the Senate for such period and in such circumstances as may be prescribed in the 
Standing Orders of the Senate; 

(b) if, with his consent, he is nominated as a candidate for election to the House of Representatives; 

(c) ifhe ceases to be a citizen of Belize; 

(d) subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, if'any circumstances arise that, if he were not a 
Senator, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such by virtue of section 63 (1) of this Constitution; 

390£2001. 13 0£2008. 

(e) if the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister in the case of a Senator appointed 
in accordance with that advice, or acting in accordance with the advice of the Leader ofthe Opposition in the case of a 
Senator appointed in accordance with that advice, or acting in accordance with the advice of any organization referred to 
in paragraph ( c), (d), (e) and (t) of subsection (4) of section 61 of this Constitution in the case of a Senator 
appointed in accordance with that advice, declares the seat of that Senator to be vacant; 

(j) ifhe shall become a party to any contract with the Government for or on account of the public service, or if any finn 
in which he is a partner or any company of which he is a director or manager shall become a party to any such contract, or 
if he shall become a partner in a finn or a director or manager of a company which is a party to any such contract: 

Provided that if in the circumstances it shall appear to him to be just so to do, the Governor-General, acting in his own 
deliberate judgment, may exempt any Senator from vacating his seat under the provisions of this paragraph if such Senator 
shall, before becoming a party to such contract as aforesaid or before or as soon as practicable after becoming otherwise 
interested in such contract (whether as partner in a firm or director or manager of a company), disclose to the 
Governor-General the nature of such contract and his interest or the interest of any such firm or company therein. 

(3) (a) If circumstances such as are referred to in paragraph (d) of subsection (2) of this section arise because a 
Senator is under sentence of death or imprisonment, or adjudged to be insane or otherwise of unsound mind, or declared 
bankrupt and is undischarged, or convicted of an offence relating to elections, and it is open to the Senator to appeal 
against the decision (either with the leave of a court or other authority or without such leave), he shall forthwith cease 
to perform his functions as a Senator but, subject to the provisions of this subsection, he shall not vacate his seat 
until the expiration of a period ofthirty days thereafter: 

Provided that the President of the Senate may from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to 
enable the Senator to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the 
aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, ofthe Senate. 

(b) If, on the determination of an appeal, such circumstances continue to exist and no further appeal is open to the 
Senator, or if, by reason ofthe expiration of any period for entering an appeal or notice thereof or the refusal ofleave 
to appeal or for any other reason, it ceases to be open to the Senator to appeal, he shall forthwith vacate his seat. 

(c) If at any time before the Senator vacates his seat such circumstances as aforesaid cease to exist, his seat shall not 
become vacant on the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection and he may resume the 
performance of his functions as Senator. 

65.-(1) The Governor-General may declare a Senator to be, by reason of illness, temporarily incapable of performing his 
functions as a Senator and thereupon such Senator shall not perform his said functions until he is declared by the 
Governor-General again to be capable of performing them. 

(2) Whenever a Senator is incapable of performing his functions as a Senator by reason of his absence from Belize or by 
virtue of the provisions of section 64 of this Constitution or by reason of a declaration made under the last foregoing 
subsection, the Governor-General may appoint a person qualified for appointment as a Senator to be temporarily a member of 
the Senate. 

(3) Subsections (1) and (2) of section 64 of this Constitution shall apply in relation to a person appointed as a Senator 
under this section as they apply in relation to a Senator appointed under section 61 (except that paragraph (d) of the 
said subsection (2) shall apply as if it were not expressed to be subject to subsection (3) ofthe said section 64) and an 
appointment made under this section shall in any case cease to have effect when the person appointed is notified by the 
Governor-General that the circumstances giving rise to his appointment have ceased to exist. 

(4) In the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this section the Governor-General shall act-  
(a)   in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister in relation to an appointment to be temporarily a member ofthe 
Senate in place of a Senator appointed in pursuance of paragraph (a) of subsection (2) of section 61 of this Constitution;     
(b)   in accordance with the advice of the Leader of the Opposition in relation to an appointment to be temporarily a 
member of the Senate in place of a Senator appointed in pursuance of paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of the said section;     
(c)   after consultation with the Belize Advisory Council in any other case.     

66.-(1) When the Senate first meets after any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch of any other 
business, it shall elect a person from among persons who are not members of either House to be President of the Senate; 
and if the office ofthe President falls vacant at any time before the dissolution of the National Assembly, the Senate 
shall as soon as practicable elect another person in like manner from among persons who are not members of either House to 
that office. 

(2) When the Senate first meets after any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch of any other business 
except the election of the President, it shall elect a Senator, who is not a Minister, to be Vice-President of the Senate; 
and if the office of Vice-President falls vacant at any time before the next dissolution of the National Assembly, the 
Senate shall, as soon as practicable, elect another Senator to that office. 

(3) The President and the Vice-President shall be of or above the age of twenty-four years and the President shall be 
elected from among persons who are not members of either House: 

Provided that a person shall not be elected as President 

if- 

(i) he is not a citizen of Belize; or 

(ii) he is a person disqualified for election as a member of the House of Representatives by virtue of section 58 (1) of 
this Constitution. 

(4) A person shall vacate the office of President or Vice- President of the Senate- 

(a) in the case of a President- 

(i) upon any dissolution of the National Assembly; 

(ii) ifhe ceases to be a citizen of Belize; or 

(iii) if any circumstances arise which would cause him to be disqualified for election as a member of the House of 
Representatives by virtue of section 5 8( 1) of the Constitution; 

(b) in the case of the Vice-President- 

(i) ifhe ceases to be a Senator; or 

(ii) ifhe is appointed to be a Minister. 

(5) (a) If, by virtue of section 64 (3) of this Constitution, the President or the Vice-President is required to cease to 
perform his functions as a Senator he shall also cease to perform his functions as President or Vice- President, as the 
case may be, and those functions shall, until he vacates his seat in the Senate or resumes the performance of the 
functions of his office, be performed- 

(i) in the case of the President, by the Vice­ President or, ifthe office of Vice-President is vacant, by such Senator 
(not being a Minister) as the Senate may elect for the purpose; 

(ii) in the case of the Vice-President, by such Senator (not being a Minister) as the Senate may elect for the purpose. 

(b) If the President or Vice-President resumes the performance of his functions as Senator, in accordance with the 
provisions of section 64 (3) of this Constitution, he shall also resume the performance of his functions as President or 
Vice-President, as the case may be. 

67.-(1) There shall be a Clerk to the National Assembly (who shall be the Clerk to both Houses) and a Deputy Clerk and 
such other assistants as may be necessary. 

(2) The National Assembly may by law regulate the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons referred to in 
subsection (1). 

Powers and Procedure 

68. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may make laws for the peace, order and good 
government of Belize. 

69.-(1) The National Assembly may alter any of the provisions of this Constitution in the manner specified in the 
following provisions of this section. 

Clerks to Houses of National Assembly. 

(2) Until after the first general election held after Independence Day a Bill to alter any of the provisions of this 
Constitution shall not be regarded as being passed by the National Assembly unless on its final reading in each House the 
Bill is supported by the unanimous vote of all members of that House. 

(3) A Bill to alter this section, Schedule 2 to this Constitution or any of the provisions of this Constitution specified 
in that Schedule shall not be regarded as being passed by the House of Representatives unless on its final reading in the 
House the Bill is supported by the votes of not less than three-quarters of all the members ofthe House. 

(4) A Bill to alter any of the provisions of this Constitution other than those referred to in subsection (3) of this 
section shall not be regarded as being passed by the House of Representatives unless on its final reading in the House 
the Bill is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House. 

(5) A Bill to alter any of the provisions of this Constitution referred to in subsection (3) ofthis section shall not be 
submitted to the Governor-General for his assent unless there has been an interval of not less than ninety days between 
the introduction of the Bill in the House of Representatives and the beginning of the proceedings in the House on the 
second reading of the Bill. 

(5A) Subject to sections 78 and 79 of this Constitution, a Bill to alter any provision of part II of the Constitution 
shall not be regarded as being passed by the National Assembly unless it is supported by a simple majority of the Senate. 

(6) (aJ A Bill to alter any of the provisions of this Constitution shall not be submitted to the Governor-General for 
assent unless it is accompanied by a certificate of the Speaker signed by him that the provisions of subsection (2), (3) 
or (4) of this section, as the case may be, have been complied with. 

(b) The certificate of the Speaker under this subsection shall be conclusive that the provisions of subsection (2), (3) or 
(4) ofthis section, as the case may be, have been complied with and shall not be enquired into by any court oflaw. 

(c) In this subsection, references to the Speaker shall, if the person holding the office of Speaker is for any reason 
unable to perform the functions of his office and no other person is performing them, include references to the Deputy 
Speaker. 

(7) In this section and Schedule 2 to this Constitution, Schedule 2. references to any of the provisions of this 
Constitution include references to any law that alters that provision. 

(8) In this section, references to altering this Constitution or any provision thereof include references- 

(a) to revoking it, with or without re-enactment thereof or the making of different provision in lieu thereof; 

(b) to modifying it, whether by ormttmg or amending any of its provisions or inserting additional provisions in it or 
otherwise; and 

(c) to suspending its operations for any period or terminating any such suspension. 

70.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, each House may make, amend or revoke Standing Orders for the 
regulation and orderly conduct of its own proceedings and the dispatch of business, and the passing, instituting and 
numbering of Bills and the presentation of the same to the Governor-General for assent. 

(2) A Minister shall be permitted to address the House of which he is not a member but shall have no vote in that House. 

71.-(1) Except for the purposes of enabling this section to be complied with, no member of either House shall sit or vote 
therein, or be entitled to receive any salary or emoluments in respect of his office until he has made and subscribed 
before that House the oath of allegiance and office: 

Provided that the election of a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives and the election of a President 
and Vice-President of the Senate may take place before the members of the House of Representatives or of the Senate, as 
the case may be, have made and subscribed such oath. 

(2) If between the time when a person becomes a member of the House of Representatives and the time when that House first 
meets thereafter, a meeting takes place of any committee of that House of which that person is a member, that person may, 
in order to enable him to attend the meeting and take part in the proceedings ofthe committee, make and subscribe the 
oath before the Speaker or, if the Speaker is absent from Belize or the office of Speaker is vacant, before the Deputy 
Speaker; and the making and subscribing of the oath in such manner shall suffice for all the purposes of this section. 

(3) The provisions of subsection (2) of this section shall apply in relation to a person who becomes a member of the 
Senate as they apply in relation to a person who becomes a member of the House of Representatives but as if references to 
the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker were references to the President and the Vice-President. 

72.-(1) The Speaker, or in his absence, the Deputy Speaker, or, ifthey are both absent, a member of the House of 
Representatives (not being a Minister) elected by the House for that sitting shall preside at each sitting of the House. 

Presiding in House of Representatives and Senate. 

(2) The President, or in his absence, the Vice­ President, or, if they are both absent, a Senator (not being a Minister) 
elected by the Senate for that sitting shall preside at each sitting of the Senate. 

(3) References in this section to circumstances in which the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, President or Vice­ President is 
absent include references to circumstances in which the office of Speaker, Deputy Speaker, President or Vice-President is 
vacant. 

73.-(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, Voting all questions proposed for decision in either House shall
be determined by a majority of the votes of the members thereof present and voting. 

(2) A Speaker elected from among persons who are members of the House of Representatives or a President elected from among
persons who are Senators or a member of either House presiding in that House shall have an original but not a casting vote. 

(3) A Speaker elected from among persons who are not members of the House of Representatives or a President elected from 
among persons who are not Senators shall have no vote. 

(4) If upon any question before either House the votes of the members are equally divided the motion shall be lost. 

74. Without prejudice to any provision made by the National Assembly relating to the powers, privileges and immunities of 
the Senate or the House of Representatives and the committees thereof, or the privileges and immunities of the members and 
officers of either House and of other persons concerned in the business of either House or the committees thereof, no 
civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against any member of either House for words spoken before, or written in 
a report to, either House or a committee thereof or by reason of any matter or thing brought by him therein by petition, 
Bill, resolution, motion or otherwise. 

75. A House shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy in the membership thereof 
(including any vacancy not filled when the House is first constituted or is reconstituted at any time) and any proceedings 
therein shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled so to do sat and voted in the House or 
otherwise took part in the proceedings. 

76.-(1) If at any sitting of either House any member of the House who is present draws the attention of the person 
presiding at the sitting to the absence of a quorum and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the Standing Orders 
of the House, the person presiding at the sitting ascertains that a quorum of the House is still not present, the House 
shall be adjourned. 

(2) For the purposes of this section- 

(a) a quorum of the House of Representatives shall consist of seven members ofthe House; 

(b) a quorum ofthe Senate shall consist of three Senators; 

(c) the person presiding at the sitting of either House shall not be included in reckoning whether there is a quorum of 
that House present. 

77.-(1) A Bill other than a money Bill maybe introduced in either House. A money Bill shall not be introduced in the 
Senate. 

(2) Except on the recommendation or with the consent ofthe Cabinet, signified by a Minister, neither House shall- 

(a) proceed with any Bill (including any amendment to a Bill) which, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes 
provision for any ofthe following purposes- 

(i) for imposing or increasing or reducing or abolishing any tax; 

(ii) for imposing or increasing any charge on the revenues or other funds of Belize or for altering any such charge 
otherwise than by reducing it; or 

(iii) for compounding or remitting any debt due to Belize; 

(b) proceed upon any motion (including any amendment to a motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the person 
presiding, would be to make provision for any of the purposes aforesaid; or 

(c) receive any petition which, in the opinion of the person presiding, requests that provision be made for any of the 
purposes aforesaid. 

78.-(1) If a money Bill, having been passed by the House of Representatives and sent to the Senate at least one month 
before the end of the session, is not passed by the Senate without amendment within one month after it is sent to that
House, the Bill shall, unless the House of Representatives otherwise resolves, be presented to the Governor-General for 
assent notwithstanding that the Senate has not consented to the Bill. 

(2) There shall be endorsed on every money Bill when it is sent to the Senate the certificate of the Speaker signed by him 
that it is a money Bill; and there shall be endorsed on any money Bill that is presented to the Governor­ General for 
assent in pursuance of subsection (1) of this section the certificate of the Speaker signed by him that it is a money Bill 
and that the provisions of that subsection have been complied with. 

79.-(1) If any Bill other than a money Bill is passed by the House of Representatives in two successive sessions (whether 
or not the National Assembly is dissolved between those sessions) and, having been sent to the Senate in each of those 
sessions at least one month before the end of the session, is rejected by the Senate in each of those sessions, that Bill 
shall, on its rejection for the second time by the Senate, unless the House of Representatives otherwise resolves, be 
presented to the Governor-General for assent notwithstanding that the Senate has not consented to the Bill: 

Provided that the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not have effect unless at least six months have elapsed 
between the date on which the Bill is passed by the House of Representatives in the first session and the date on which it
is passed by the House in the second session. 

(2) For the purposes of this section a Bill that is sent to the Senate from the House of Representatives in any session 
shall be deemed to be the same Bill as a former Bill sent to the Senate in the preceding session if, when it is sent to 
the Senate, it is identical with the former Bill or contains only such amendments as are certified by the Speaker to be 
necessary owing to the time that has elapsed since the date of the former Bill or to represent any amendments which have 
been made by the Senate in the former Bill in the preceding session. 

(3) The House of Representatives may, if it thinks fit, on the passage through that House of a Bill that is deemed to be 
the same Bill as a former Bill sent to the Senate in the preceding session, suggest any amendments without inserting the 
amendments in the Bill, and if agreed to by the Senate the said amendments shall be treated as amendments made by the 
Senate and agreed to by the House of Representatives; but the exercise of this power by the House of Representatives shall 
not affect the operation of this section in the event of the rejection of the Bill in the Senate. 

(4) There shall be inserted in any Bill that is presented to the Governor-General for assent in pursuance of this section 
any amendments that are certified by the Speaker to have been made in the Bill by the Senate in the second session and 
agreed to by the House of Representatives. 

(5) There shall be endorsed on any Bill that is presented to the Governor-General for assent in pursuance of this section 
the certificate of the Speaker signed by him that the provisions ofthis section have been complied with. 

80.-(1) In sections 77, 78 and 79 of this Constitution, "money Bill" means a public Bill, which, in the opinion of the 
Speaker, contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely, the imposition, repeal, 
remission, alteration or regulation of taxation; the imposition, for the payment of debt or other financial purposes, of 
charges on public money, or the variation or repeal of any such charges; the grant of money to the Crown or to any 
authority or person, or the variation or revocation of any such grant; the appropriation, receipt, custody, investment, 
issue or audit of accounts of public money; the raising or guarantee of any loan or the repayment thereof, or the 
establishment, alteration, administration or abolition of any sinking fund provided in connection with any such loan; or 
subordinate matters incidental to any of the matters aforesaid; and in this subsection the expressions "taxation", "debt",
"public money" and "loan" do not include any taxation imposed, debt incurred or money provided or loan raised by any local 
authority or body for local purposes. 

(2) For the purposes of section 79 ofthis Constitution, a Bill shall be deemed to be rejected by the Senate if- 

(a) it is not passed by the Senate without amendment; or 

(b) it is passed by the Senate with any amendment which is not agreed to by the House of Representatives. 

(3) Whenever the office of Speaker is vacant or the Speaker is for any reason unable to perform any functions conferred on 
him by section 78 or 79 of this Constitution or subsection (1) of this section, that function may be performed by the 
Deputy Speaker. 

(4) A certificate ofthe Speaker or the Deputy Speaker under section 78 or 79 ofthis Constitution shall be conclusive for 
all purposes and shall not be questioned in any court of law. 

(5) Before giving any certificate under section 78 or 79 of this Constitution the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, as the 
case may be, shall consult the Attorney-General or, if the Attorney-General is absent from the seat ofGovemment, such 
member ofthe Attorney-General' s staff as the Attorney­ General may designate for that purpose. 

81.-(1) The power of the National Assembly to make laws shall be exercised by Bills passed by the Senate and the House of 
Representatives (or in the cases mentioned in sections 78 and 79 of this Constitution by the House of Representatives) and 
assented to by the Governor-General. 

(2) When a Bill is submitted to the Governor-General for assent in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution he 
shall signify that he assents or that he withholds assent thereto. 

(3) When the Governor-General assents to a Bill that has been submitted to him in accordance with the provisions of this 
Constitution the Bill shall become law and the Governor-General shall thereupon cause it to be published in the Gazette as 
law. 

(4) No law made by the National Assembly shall come into operation until it has been assented to by the Governor-General 
but the National Assembly may postpone the coming into operation of any such law and may make laws with retrospective 
effect. 

(5) All laws made by the National Assembly shall be styled "Acts". 

82.-(1) In every Bill presented to the Governor-General for assent, other than a Bill presented under section 78 or 

79 of this Constitution, the words of enactment shall be as follows:- 

"Be it enacted, by and with the advice and consent of the House of Representatives and the Senate of Belize and by the 
authority ofthe same, as follows:" 

(2) In every Bill presented to the Governor-General for assent under section 78 or 79 of this Constitution, the words of 
enactment shall be as follows:- 

"Be it enacted, by and with the advice and consent of the House of Representatives of Belize in accordance with the 
provisions of section 78 (or section 79, as the case may be) of the Constitution and by the authority of the same, as 
follows:-" 

(3) Any alteration of the words of enactment of a Bill made in consequence of the provisions ofthe preceding subsection 
shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the Bill. 

83.-( 1) There shall be a session ofthe National Assembly at least once in every year, and each session shall be held at 
such place within Belize and shall begin at such time (not being later than six months from the end of the preceding 
session ifthe National Assembly has been prorogued or four months from the end ofthe session if the National Assembly has 
been dissolved) as the Governor-General shall appoint by proclamation published in the Gazette. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the sittings of each House shall be held at such time and 
place as that House may, by its Standing Orders or otherwise, determine: 

Provided that the first sitting of each House after the National Assembly has at anytime been prorogued or dissolved shall 
begin at the same time. 

84.-(1) The Governor-General may at any time prorogue or dissolve the National Assembly. 

(2) Subj ect to the provisions of subsection (3) ofthis section the National Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall 
continue for five years from the date ofthe first sitting of the House of Representatives after any dissolution and shall 
then stand dissolved. 

(3) At any time when Belize is at war, the National Assembly may by law extend the period of five years specified in 
subsection (2) ofthis section for not more than twelve months at a time: 

Provided that the life of the National Assembly shall not be extended under this subsection for more than two years. 

(4) In the exercise of his powers to dissolve the National Assembly, the Governor-General shall act In accordance with
the advice of the Prime Minister: 

Provided that- 

(a) if the Prime Minister advises a dissolution and the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers 
that the Government of Belize can be carried on without a dissolution and that a dissolution would not be in the interests 
of deliberate judgment, refuse to dissolve the National Assembly; 

(b) if a resolution of no confidence in the Government is passed by the House of Representatives and the Prime Minister 
does not within seven days either resign or advise a dissolution, the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate 
judgment, may dissolve the National Assembly; and 

(c) acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that there is no prospect of his being able within a reasonable time 
to make an appointment to that office, the Governor­ General shall dissolve the National Assembly. 

(5) If, between a dissolution ofthe National Assembly and the next ensuing general election of members of the House of 
Representatives, an emergency arises of such a nature that, in the opinion of the Prime Minister, it is necessary for the 
two Houses or either of them to be summoned before that general election can be held, the Governor-General may, by 
proclamation published in the Gazette, summon the two Houses of the preceding National Assembly and that National Assembly 
shall thereupon be deemed (except for the purposes of section 85 of this Constitution) not to have been dissolved but 
shall be deemed (except as aforesaid) to be dissolved on the date on which the polls are held in the next ensuing general 
election. 

(6) During the period between the dissolution of the National Assembly and the appointment of a Prime Minister after a 
general election, the government of Belize shall continue to be administered by the Prime Minister and the other Ministers 
and Deputy Ministers of the Government. 

85.-(1) A general election of members of the House of Representatives shall be held at such time within three months after 
every dissolution of the National Assembly as the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime 
Minister, shall appoint. 

(2) As soon as practicable after every general election, the Governor-General shall proceed under section 61 ofthis 
Constitution to the appointment of Senators. 

(3) Where the seat of a member of the House of Representatives or a Senator falls vacant otherwise than by reason of a 
dissolution of the National Assembly- 

(a) if the vacant seat is that of a member of the House, a by-election shall be held; or 

(b) if the vacant seat is that of a Senator, an appointment shall be made, 

to fill the vacancy within three months ofthe occurrence of the vacancy unless the National Assembly is sooner dissolved. 

86.-(1) Any question whether- 

(a) any person has been validly elected as a member of the House of Representatives or validly appointed as a Senator; 

(b) any member ofthe House of Representatives or Senator has vacated his seat or is required, under the provisions of 
section 59 (3) or section 64 (3) ofthis Constitution, to cease to exercise any of his functions as a member of the House 
of Representatives or as a Senator; or 

(c) any person has been validly elected as Speaker of the House of Representatives or President of the Senate from among 
persons who are not members ofthe House of Representatives or Senators, or, having been so elected, has vacated the 
office of Speaker or of President, shall be determined by the Supreme Court in accordance with the provisions of any law. 

(2) Proceedings for the determination of any question referred to in the preceding subsection shall not be instituted 
except with the leave of a justice of the Supreme Court. 

(3) No appeal shall lie from the decision ofajustice ofthe Supreme Court granting or refusing leave to institute 
proceedings in accordance with the preceding subsection. 

87.-(1) Any person who sits or votes in either House knowing or having reasonable cause for knowing that he is not 
entitled to do so shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars or such other sum as may hereafter be 
prescribed by the Speaker and the President, for every day he so sits or votes in that House. 

(2) The penalty referred to in subsection (1) shall be recoverable by action in the Supreme Court at the suit of the 
Attorney-General. 

88.-(1) There shall be an Elections and Boundaries Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and four other members who
shall be persons of integrity and high national standing. 

(2) The chairman and two other members of the Elections and Boundaries Commission shall be appointed by the 
Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of 
the Opposition, and the remaining two members shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the 
advice of the Prime Minister given with the concurrence of the Leader of the Opposition: 

Provided that in the process of consultation with the Leader ofthe Opposition for the appointment ofthe Chairman, the 
Prime Minister shall use his best endeavours to secure the agreement of the Leader of the Opposition. 

(3) No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly 
or ifhe holds or is acting in any public office. 

(4) If any member of the Commission dies or resigns, the Governor-General shall appoint another person in his place in 
the same manner in which such member was appointed. 

(5) Subject to the provisions ofthis section, the office of a member of the Commission shall become vacant- 

(a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment; or 

(b) if any circumstances arise that, ifhe were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for 
appointment as such. 

(6) A member of the Commission may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office 
(whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed 
except in accordance with the provisions of this section. 

(7) A member of the Commission shall be removed from office by the Governor-General if the question of the removal of 
that member from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council in accordance with the next following subsection 
and the Belize Advisory Council has advised the Governor-General that the member ought to be removed from office for 
inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour . 

(8) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor­ General that the question of removing a member of the Commission 
under this section ought to be investigated, then- 

(a) the Governor-General shall refer the matter to the Belize Advisory Council which shall sit as a tribunal in the manner 
provided in section 54 of this Constitution; and 

(b) the Belize Advisory Council shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
advise the Governor-General whether that member of the Commission should be removed under this section. 

(9) If the question of removing a member of the Commission from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council 
under the preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend the member from performing the functions of his office, 
and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any case cease to have effect if 
the Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor-General that the member should not be removed from office. 

(10) If the office of a member of the Commission is vacant or a member is for any reason unable to perform the functions 
of his office, the Governor-General may appoint another person in the same manner in which such member was appointed, to 
act as a member of the Commission, and any person so appointed shall, subject to the provisions of subsections (6), (7), 
(8) and (9) of this section, continue to act until he is notified by the Governor­ General that the circumstances giving 
rise to the appointment have ceased to exist. 

(11) A member of the Commission shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath 
of allegiance and office. 

(12) The Commission may regulate its own procedure and, with the approval of the Governor-General given in accordance with 
the advice of the Prime Minister, confer powers or impose duties on any public officer or authority of the Government for 
the purpose of the discharge of its functions. 

(13) The Commission shall be responsible for the direction and supervision of the registration of voters and the conduct 
of elections, referenda and all matters connected therewith. 

(14) In the exercise of its functions, the Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person 
or authority and shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, act in accordance with the Representation ofthe 
People Act or any other law, rule or regulation relating to elections. 

89.-(1) For the purposes of the election of members of the House of Representatives, Belize shall be divided into 
thirty-one electoral divisions, the names and boundaries of which are set out in Schedule 1 to the Representation of the 
People Act. 

(2) Each electoral division shall be represented in the House of Representatives by one elected member. 

90.-(1) The Elections and Boundaries Commission shall, after considering the distribution of the population throughout 
Belize, make proposals from time to time for dividing Belize into electoral divisions in such a way that- 

(a) each electoral division shall have as nearly as may be an equal number of persons eligible to vote; 

(b) the total number of electoral divisions shall be not less than twenty-eight. 

(2) In fixing the boundaries of electoral divisions the Commission shall have regard to the transport and other facilities 
of the division, and to its physical features. 

(3) The proposals of the Commission made pursuant to this section shall be laid before the National Assembly by the 
Chairman of the Commission, and the electoral divisions specified in those proposals shall be the electoral divisions of 
Belize for the purposes of any law for the time being in force relating to the election of members of the House of 
Representatives when, and shall not be such electoral divisions until, enacted as law by the National Assembly. 

(4) When the Elections and Boundaries Commission considers it necessary to increase the number of electoral divisions as 
specified in subsection (1), it shall make proposals to the National Assembly, and the National Assembly may enact a law 
to give effect to such proposals, with such amendments and modifications as may seem appropriate to the National Assembly. 

91. Any redivision of electoral divisions effected in accordance with section 90 of this Constitution shall, in respect 
of the election of members of the House of Representatives, come into operation at the next general election held after 
such redivision and not earlier. 

92. At any general election- 

(a) every citizen of Belize or a citizen of any Commonwealth Country who has attained the age of eighteen years and who 
satisfies the requirements of the Representation of the CAP.9. People Act shall have the right to vote; 

(b) no person shall be entitled to more than one vote; and 

(c) votes shall be cast in a secret ballot. 

93. Subject to the provisions of sections 88 to 92 inclusive of this Constitution, the provisions of the Representation of 
the People Act shall apply to the franchise, registration of voters, the administration ofthe electoral system, offences 
relating to the electoral system, the conduct of elections, and all matters connected therewith. 

Conduct of elections, etc. 2 of 1978. CAP. 9. 

PART VII 

The Judiciary 

93A.-(1) There shall be established in each judicial district of Belize a "Summary Jurisdiction Court" which shall have 
and exercise criminal jurisdiction, and a "District Court" which shall have and exercise civil jurisdiction. 

Magistracy. 230f200S. 

(2) The power and jurisdiction of a Summary Jurisdiction Court and a District Court shall be such as may from time to time 
be prescribed by the National Assembly by a law made in that behalf. 

(3) A magistrate shall be appointed by the Judicial and Legal Services Commission and shall, subject to any law passed by 
the National Assembly, be a qualified attomey­ at-law. 

(4) A magistrate who is a qualified attorney-at-law shall have security oftenure and, subject to any compulsory retirement 
age for public officers, may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether 
arising from infirmity of mind or body or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour. 

94. There shall be for Belize a Supreme Court ofJudicature and Court of Appeal. 

95.-(1) The Supreme Court shall have unlimited original jurisdiction to hear and determine any civil or criminal 
proceedings under any law and such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other 
law: 

Provided that the Supreme Court shall not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any application made by a person 
sentenced to death under any law after the expiration of one year from the passing of the sentence. 

(2) The justices of the Supreme Court shall be the Chief Justice and such number of other justices as may from time to 
time be prescribed by the National Assembly: 

Provided that the office of a justice shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof. 

(3) The Supreme Court shall be a superior court of record and, save as otherwise provided by any law, shall have all the 
powers of such a court. 

(4) The Supreme Court shall sit in such places as the Chief Justice may appoint. 

96.-(1) Subject to the provisions of sections 33(2), 34(4), 54(18),69(6),80(4) and 123(3) ofthis Constitution, where any 
question as to the interpretation of this Constitution or the interpretation or application of the Treaty (as defined in 
section 131 of this Constitution) arises in any court of law established for Belize (other than the Supreme Court or the 
Court of Appeal), and the court is ofthe opinion that the question involves a substantial question oflaw, the court shall 
refer the question to the Supreme Court. 

(2) Where any question is referred to the Supreme Court in pursuance of this section, the Supreme Court shall, subject to 
subsection (3) below, give its decision upon the question and the court in which the question arose shall dispose of the 
case in accordance with that decision or, if the decision is the subj ect of an appeal to the Court of Appeal or the 
Caribbean Court of Justice, in accordance with the decision of the Court of Appeal or, as the case may be, the Caribbean 
Court of Justice. 

(3) Where the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal is seised of an issue the resolution of which involves a question 
concerning the interpretation or application of the Treaty, the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal, as the case may be, 
shall, if it considers that a decision on the question is necessary to enable it to deliver judgment, refer the question 
to the Caribbean Court of Justice for determination before delivering judgment. 

97.-(1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime 
Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(2) Justices of the Supreme Court other than the Chief Justice shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in 
accordance with the advice of the Judicial and 

Referral of certain questions to the Supreme Court and the Caribbean Court of Justice. 

Legal Services Commission and with the concurrence of the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the 
Opposition. 

(3) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a justice of the Supreme Court unless- 

(a) he is qualified to practise as an attorney-at­ law in a court in Belize or as an advocate in a court in any other 
part ofthe Commonwealth having unlimited jurisdiction either in civil or criminal causes or matters; and 

(b) he has been qualified for not less than five years so to practise in such a court. 

(4) Ifthe office of Chief Justice is vacant or the Chief Justice is for any reason including his absence from Belize 
unable to exercise the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions 
of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, they shall be 
exercised by the justice other than the Chief Justice, or if there be more than one then by such one of the justices as 
may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Governor-General, acting in the manner prescribed in subsection 
(1) of this section. 

(5) If the office of any justice other than the Chief Justice is vacant or if any such justice is appointed to act as 
Chief Justice or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office or if the Chief Justice advises the 
Governor-General that the state ofbusiness in the Supreme Court so requires, the Governor-General, acting in the manner 
prescribed in subsection (2) of this section, may appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed as a justice of the 
Supreme Court to act as a justice of that court: 

Provided that a person may act as a justice notwithstanding 2 of 2001. that he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 

(6) Any person appointed under subsection (5) of this section to act as ajustice shall, subject to the provisions of 
subsections (4) and (6) of section 98 of this Constitution, continue to act for the period of his appointment or, if no 
such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the Governor-General: 

Provided that, notwithstanding the expiration of the period of his appointment or the revocation of his appointment, he 
may thereafter continue to act as a justice for so long as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any 
other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto. 

98.-(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, a justice of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he 
attains the age of sixty-five years: 

Provided that- 

(a) he may at any time resign his office; and 

(b) the Governor-General- 

(i) in the case of the ChiefJustice, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after consultation 
with the Leader ofthe Opposition; and 

(ii) in the case of a Justice of the Supreme Court other than the Chief Justice, acting in accordance with the advice of 
the Judicial and Legal Services Commission and with the concurrence ofthe Prime Minister given after consultation with 
the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a person over the age of sixty-five years as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
or may permit a Justice who attains the age of sixty- five years to continue in office, until, in either case, such 
person has attained any later age not exceeding seventy- five years. 

(2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at which he is required by or under this section to vacate his office, a 
person holding the office of a justice ofthe Supreme Court may continue in office for so long after attaining that age as 
may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were 
commenced before him before he attained that age. 

(3) A justice of the Supreme Court may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office 
(whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed 
except in accordance with the provisions of this section. 

(4) A justice of the Supreme Court may be removed from office if the question of his removal from office for inability to 
perform the functions of his office or for misbehaviour has been referred to the Judicial and Legal Services Commission 
in writing and the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, after considering the matter, recommends in writing to the 
Belize Advisory Council that the question of removal ought to be investigated. 

(5) For the purpose of investigating the question of the removal of a Justice of the Supreme Court referred to it under 
subsection (4), the Belize Advisory Council shall:- 

(a) sit as a tribunal in the manner provided in 390f2001. section 54 ofthis Constitution; and 

(b) enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and advise the Governor-General 
whether the Justice of the Supreme Court should be removed from office in accordance with this section. 

(6) If the question of removing a justice of the Supreme Court from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory 
Council under the preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend the justice from performing the functions of his 
office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any case cease to have 
effect if the Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor-General that the justice should not be removed from office. 

(7) If the Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor-General that the Justice of the Supreme Court ought to be or not 
to be removed from office, the Governor­ General shall not notify the Justice in writing accordingly. 

(8) The power to remove a Justice of the Supreme Court from office for inability to perform the functions of his office or
for misbehaviour vest in the Governor-General, acting in accordance with this section. 

99. Ajustice of the Supreme Court shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the 
oath of allegiance and office. 

100. -( 1 ) The Court of Appeal shall have such jurisdiction and powers to hear and determine appeals in civil and 
criminal matters as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other law. 

(2) The Judges of the Court of Appeal (hereinafter referred to as "Justices of Appeal") shall be a President and such 
number of other Justices as may be prescribed by the National Assembly: 

Provided that the office of Justice of Appeal shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder of that office. 

(3) The Court of Appeal shall be a superior court of record and, save as otherwise provided by any law, shall have all 
the powers of such a court. 

(4) The Court of Appeal shall sit in such places as the President may appoint. 

101.-(1) The Justices of Appeal shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the 
Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader ofthe Opposition, for such period as may be specified in the 
instrument of appointment. 

Provided that where no period is specified in an instrument of appointment, such appointment shall be deemed to subsist 
until- 

(a) in the case of an instrument of appointment existing at the date of commencement of the Belize Constitution (Sixth 
Amendment) Act, 2008 - one year after such commencement; 

(b) in the case of an instrument of appointment issued after the commencement ofthe Belize Constitution (Sixth Amendment) 
Act, 2008- one year after the date of issue of such instrument. 

(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Justice of Appeal unless either- 

(a) he holds or has held office as judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some 
part of the Commonwealth or a court havingjurisdiction in appeals from any such court; or 

(b) he is qualified to practise as an attorney-at­ law in a court in Belize or as an advocate in a court in any other part
of the Commonwealth having unlimited jurisdiction in either civil or criminal causes or matters and has been so qualified 
for not less than fifteen years. 

(3) Any power exercisable by a single Justice of Appeal may, at any time when there is no such Justice present in Belize 
and able to perform the functions of his office, be exercised by a justice of the Supreme Court as if that justice were a 
Justice of Appeal. 

(4) If the office of the President is vacant or he is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then 
until some other person has been appointed to or has been appointed to act in, and has assumed the functions of that 
office, or until the President has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by 
such one of the other Justices of Appeal as the Governor­ General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime 
Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint for that purpose. 

(5) If the office of a Justice of Appeal other than the President is vacant, or if any such Justice is appointed to act as
the President, or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the Governor-General, acting in 
accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a
person possessing such legal qualifications and experience as he, after consultation with the President, may deem 
appropriate to be temporarily a Justice of Appeal. 

(6) Any person appointed under subsection (5) of this section to be temporarily a Justice of Appeal shall hold office 
until his appointment is revoked by the Govemor­ General. 

102.-(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, the office of a Justice of Appeal shall become vacant upon 
the expiration of the period of his appointment to that office or if he resigns his office. 

Provided that where no period is specified in an instrument of appointment, the office of a Justice of Appeal shall become
vacant upon the expiry of the period specified in the Proviso to subsection (1) of section 101. 

(2) A Justice of Appeal may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether 
arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in 
accordance with the provisions of this section. 

(3) A Justice ofthe Court of Appeal may be removed from office if the question of his removal from office for inability to 
perform the functions of his office or for misbehaviour has been referred to the Judicial and Legal Services Commission 
in writing and the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, after considering the matter, recommends in writing to the 
Belize Advisory Council that the question of removal ought to be investigated. 

(4) For the purpose of investigating the question of the removal of a Justice of the Court of Appeal referred to it under 
subsection (3), the Belize Advisory Council shall:- 

(a) sit as a tribunal in the manner provided in section 54 of this Constitution; and 

(b) enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and advise the Governor-General 
whether the Justice of the Court of Appeal should be removed from office in accordance with this section. 

(5) If the question of removing a Justice of Appeal from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council under 
the preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend the Justice from performing the functions of his office, and 
any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any case cease to have effect if the 
Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor­ General that the Justice should not be removed from office. 

(6) If the Belize Advisory Council advises the 390(2001 Governor-General that the justice of the Court of Appeal 

ought to be or not to be removed from office, the Governor- 

General shall notify the Justice in writing accordingly. 

(7) The power to remove a Justice of the Court of Appeal from office for inability to perform the functions of his office 
or for misbehaviour vests in the Governor­ General, acting in accordance with this section. 

103. A Justice of Appeal shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of 
allegiance and office. 

104. -(1) An appeal shall lie from final decisions of the Court of Appeal to the Caribbean Court of Justice as of right 
in the following cases - 

(a) in civil proceedings where the matter in dispute on appeal to the Caribbean Court ofJustice is of the value of not 
less than $18,250 (or such other amount as may be prescribed by the National Assembly), or where the appeal involves 
directly or indirectly a claim or a question respecting property or a right of the aforesaid value; 

(b) in proceedings for the dissolution or nullification of marriage; 

(c) in any civil or criminal proceedings which involve a question as to the interpretation of this Constitution; 

(d) in respect of a matter where this Constitution expressly provides for an appeal from the decision ofthe Court of 
Appeal; 

(e) in any proceedings that are concerned with the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred upon the Supreme Court relating 
to redress for the contravention of the provisions of this Constitution for the protection of fundamental rights; and 

(j) in respect of any other matter as may be prescribed by law. 

(2) An appeal shall lie to the Caribbean Court of Justice with leave of the Court of Appeal from decisions of the Court 
of Appeal in the following cases - 

(a) final decisions in any civil proceedings where, in the opinion of the Court of Appeal, the question involved in the 
appeal is one that by reason of its great general or public importance or otherwise, ought to be submitted to the 
Caribbean Court of Justice; and 

(b) such other cases as may be prescribed by the National Assembly by law. 

(3) Subject to subsections (1) and (2), an appeal shall lie to the Caribbean Court of Justice with the special leave of 
that Court from any decision of the Court of Appeal in any civil or criminal matter. 

(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to matters in relation to which the decision of the Court of Appeal was, 

at the time of the commencement of the Belize Constitution 40f2010. (Seventh Amendment) Act, 2009, declared to be final 
by any law. 

(5) The Caribbean Court of Justice shall, in relation to any appeal to it in any case, have all the jurisdiction and 
powers possessed in relation to the case by the Court of Appeal. 

(6) In the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, the Caribbean Court of Justice is a superior court of record for 
Belize, with such jurisdiction and powers as are conferred on it by the Agreement or by this Constitution or any other law. 

(7) The provisions of this section shall not affect any proceedings pending before the Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council immediately before the commencement ofthe Belize Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 2009. 4 of 2010. 

(8) For the purposes of this section, proceedings shall be treated as pending where leave to appeal to the Judicial 
Committee ofthe Privy Council has been granted. 

(9) Any judgment of the Judicial Committee of the Belize Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 2009 has been given, but 
has not been satisfied, may be enforced after the said commencement as ifit had been a judgment of the Caribbean Court of 
Justice. 

(10) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, the jurisdiction of Her Majesty in Council to hear appeals, 
applications and petitions from Belize is hereby abolished and all references to "Her Majesty in Council" or the "Privy 
Council" or the "Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" wherever occurring in this Constitution or in any other law, 
rule, regulation, order or instrument having effect as part ofthe law of Belize, shall be read and construed as references 
to the Caribbean Court of Justice. 

(11) If at any time after 1 st day of June, 2010, the Caribbean Court of Justice ceases to exist or ceases to exercise 
its appellate jurisdiction, this section will automatically cease to apply and it will be open to the National Assembly 
to establish by law a final Court of Appeal for Belize, or to declare any other regional appellate tribunal to be the 
final Court of Appeal for Belize. 

PART VIII 

SUB-PART I 

The Public Services Commission 

105.-(1) There shall be established for Belize a Public Services Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and five 
other members. 

(2) The Chairman and other members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with 
the advice of the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(3) No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly 
or, save in respect of the ex officio members, if he holds or is acting in any public office. 

(4) A person shall not, while he holds or is acting in the office of a member of the Commission or within a period of two
years commencing from the date on which he last held or acted in that office, be eligible for appointment to any public 
office. 

(5) Subject to the provisions ofthis section, the office of a member of the Commission shall become vacant- 

(a) at the expiration ofthree years from the date of his appointment or such earlier time, being not less than two years, 
as may be specified in the instrument by which he was appointed; or 

(b) if any circumstances arise that, ifhe were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for 
appointment as such. 

(6) A member of the Commission may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office 
(whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed 
except in accordance with the provisions of this section. 

(7) A member of the Commission shall be removed from office by the Governor-General if the question of the removal of 
that member from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council in accordance with the next following subsection 
and the Belize Advisory Council has advised the Governor-General that that member ought to be removed from office for 
inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour . 

(8) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor­ General that the question of removing a member of the Commission 
under this section ought to be investigated, then- 

(a) the Governor-General shall refer the matter to the Belize Advisory Council which shall sit as a tribunal in the 
manner provided in section 54 of this Constitution; and 

(b) the Belize Advisory Council shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
advise the Governor-General whether that member of the Commission should be removed under this section. 

(9) If the question of removing a member of the Commission from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council 
under the preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend the member from performing the functions of his office, 
and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any case cease to have effect if 
the Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor-General that the member should not be removed from office. 

(10) If the office of a member of the Commission is vacant or a member is for any reason unable to perform the functions 
of his office, the Governor -General may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment as a member of the Commission 
to act as a member ofthe Commission, and any person so appointed shall, subject to the provisions of subsections (6), (7),
(8) and (9) of this section, continue to act until he is notified by the Governor-General that the circumstances giving 
rise to the appointment have ceased to exist. 

(11) A member of the Commission shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath 
of allegiance and office. 

(12) The Commission shall, in the exercise of its functions under this Constitution, not be subject to the direction or 
control of any other person or authority. 

(13) The Commission may by regulation make provision for regulating and facilitating the performance of its functions 
under this Constitution. 

(14) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Commission may regulate its own procedure. 

(15) Any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof and, subject 
to its rules of procedure , the Commission may act not withstanding the absence of any member other than the Chairman: 

Provided that in any matter before the Commission, where the votes are equally divided, the Chairman shall have a casting 
vote in addition to his original vote. 

106.-(1) The power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the public service, other than the offices in the 
judicial and legal services and the security services, including the power to transfer or to confirm appointments, and, 
subject to the provisions of section 111 of this Constitution, the power to exercise disciplinary control over persons 
and the power to remove such persons from office, shall vest in the Public Services Commission established in accordance 
with section 105(1) of this Constitution. 

(2) Repealed. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the 
Minister or Ministers responsible for the public service given after consultation with the recognised representatives of 
the employees or other persons or groups within the public service as may be considered appropriate, may make regulations 
on any matter relating to- 

(a) the formulation of schemes for recruitment to the public service; 

(b) the determination of a code of conduct for public officers; 

(c) the fixing of salaries and privileges; 

(d) the principles governing the promotion and transfer of public officers; 

(e) measures to ensure discipline, and to govern the dismissal and retirement of public officers, including the 
procedures to be followed; 

(j) the procedure for delegation of authority by and to public officers; and 

(g) generally for the management and control of the public service. 

(4) The Public Services Commission shall, in the exercise of its functions under this section, be governed by regulations 
made under subsection (2) of this section. 

(5) The Public Services Commission may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, 
delegate any of its powers under subsection (1) ofthis section to anyone or more members of the Commission or, with the 
consent of the Prime Minister, to any public officer. 

(6) The provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall not apply in relation to the following offices, that is to 
say- 

(a) any office to which section 107 of this Constitution applies; 

(b) the offices of justice of the Supreme Court and Justice of Appeal; 

(c) the office of Auditor-General; 

(d) the office of Director of Public Prosecutions; or 

(e) any office to which section 110B of this Constitution applies. 

(7) No person shall be appointed under this section to or to act in any office on the Governor-General's personal staff 
except with the concurrence of the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment. 

107.-(1) This section applies to the offices of Solicitor General, Secretary to the Cabinet, Financial Secretary, Chief 
Executive Officer, Commissioner of Police, Commandant, Belize Defence Force, Commandant, Belize National Coast Guard 
Service, Superintendent of Prisons, Ambassador, High Commissioner or principal representative of Belize in any other 
country or accredited to any international organisation, and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, any other 
office designated by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after 
consultation with the Public Services Commission. 

(2) The power to appoint persons to hold or to act in offices to which this section applies (including the power to 
transfer or to confirm appointments) and, subject to the provisions of section 111 of this Constitution, the power to 
exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and the power to remove such persons from 
office shall vest in the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. 

108.-(1) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the 
advice ofthe Judicial and Legal Services Commission and with the concurrence of the Prime Minister given after 
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment to hold or act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions 
unless he is qualified to be appointed as a justice of the Supreme Court. 

(3) If the office of Director of Public Prosecutions is vacant or if the holder of that office is for any reason unable 
to exercise the functions of his office, the Governor­ General, acting in accordance with the advice ofthe Judicial and 
Legal Services Commission and with the concurrence of the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the 
Opposition, may appoint a person to act as Director. 

(4) A person appointed to act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions shall, subject to the provisions of 
subsections (5), (7), (8) and (9) of this section, cease so to act- 

(a) when a person is appointed to hold that office and has assumed the functions thereof or, as the case may be, when the 
person in whose place he is acting resumes the functions of that office; or 

(b) at such earlier time as may be prescribed by the terms of his appointment. 

(5) Subj ect to the provisions of subsection (6) ofthis section, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall vacate his 
office when he attains the age of sixty years or such other age as may be prescribed by the National Assembly: 

Provided that any law enacted by the National Assembly, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a 
person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Public Prosecutions, shall not have effect in relation to that 
person unless he consents that it should have effect. 

(6) The Director of Public Prosecutions may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his 
office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so 
removed except in accordance with the provisions of this section. 

(7) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall be removed from office by the Governor-General ifthe question of his 
removal from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council in accordance with the next following subsection and 
the Belize Advisory Council has advised the Governor-General that he ought to be removed from office for inability as 
aforesaid or for misbehaviour. 

(8) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor­ General that the question of removing the Director of Public 
Prosecutions under this section ought to be investigated, then- 

(a) the Governor-General shall refer the matter to the Belize Advisory Council which shall sit as a tribunal in the 
manner provided in section 54 of this Constitution; and 

(b) the Belize Advisory Council shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
advise the Governor-General whether he should be removed under this section. 

(9) Ifthe question of removing the Director of Public Prosecutions from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory 
Council under the preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend him from performing the functions of his office, 
and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any case cease to have effect if 
the Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor-General that he should not be removed from office. 

109.-(1) With effect from the 15th day of January, 2002, the Auditor-General shall be appointed by the Governor­ General, 
acting on the recommendations of both Houses of the National Assembly contained in resolutions passed in that behalf. 

(2) If, after the 15th day of January, 2002, the office of Auditor-General is vacant or if the holder of that office is 
for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office, the Governor-General, acting on the recommendations of 
both Houses of the National Assembly contained in resolutions passed in that behalf, may appoint a person to act as 
Auditor­ General. 

(3) A person appointed to act in the office of Auditor­ General shall, subject to the provisions of subsections (4), (6), 
(7) and (8) of this section, cease so to act- 

(a) after a person is appointed to hold that office and has assumed the functions thereof or, as the case may be, when 
the person in whose place he is acting resumes the functions of that office; or 

(b) at such earlier time as may be prescribed by the terms of his appointment. 

(4) Subj ect to the provisions of subsection (5) ofthis section, the Auditor-General shall vacate his office when he 
attains the age of sixty years or such other age as may be prescribed by the National Assembly: 

Provided that any law enacted by the National Assembly, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a 
person has been appointed to be or to act as Auditor­ General, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he 
consents that it should have effect. 

(5) The Auditor-General may be removed from office 130f2008. in accordance with the provisions of this section only for
inability or failure to perform the functions of his office (howsoever arising) or for misbehavior; and for the purpose
of this section, any failure or undue delay by the Auditor General to submit a report as required by section 120 shall be 
treated as a failure to perform the functions of his office. 

(6) The Auditor-General shall be removed from office by the Governor-General ifthe question of his removal from office 
has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council in accordance with the next following subsection and the Belize Advisory 
Council has advised the Governor-General that he ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for 
misbehaviour. 

(7) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor­ General that the question of removing the Auditor-General under 
this section ought to be investigated, then- 

(a) the Governor-General shall refer the matter to the Belize Advisory Council which shall sit as a tribunal in the 
manner provided in section 54 ofthis Constitution; and 

(b) the Belize Advisory Council shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and 
advise the Governor-General whether he should be removed under this section. 

(8) Ifthe question of removing the Auditor-General from office has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council under the 
preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend him from performing the functions of his office, and any such 
suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any case cease to have effect if the Belize 
Advisory Council advises the Governor­ General that he should not be removed from office. 

110. Repealed. 

110A. Repealed. 

110B.-(1) The power to appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the Prison Service (including power to confirm 
appointments) below the rank of Principal Officer, and to transfer or exercise disciplinary control over persons holding 
or acting in such offices and to remove such persons from office, shall vest in the Superintendent of Prisons. 

(2) The Superintendent of Prisons may, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, delegate any of his powers under this 
section, by directions in writing, to any other senior officer of the Prison Service. 

SUB-PART II 

The Security Services Commission 

11 OC.-(1) There shall be established for Belize a Security Services Commission. 

(2) The members of the Security Services Commission shall be appointed by the Governor-General, on the recommendation of 
the Prime Minister given after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, and shall consist of - 

(a) the Chairman of the Public Services Commission, who shall be a member and Chairman; 

(b) a former senior officer of the Belize Police Department; 

(c) a former senior officer ofthe Belize Defence Force; 

(d) one person nominated by the Leader of the Opposition; 

(e) one person from the private sector. 

110D.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the 
security services, including the power to make appointments, and to deal with all matters relating to the conditions of 
service of such officers and, subject to the provisions of section 111 of this Constitution, the power to exercise 
disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and the power to remove such persons shall vest in 
the Security Services Commission established under section 110C of this Constitution. 

(2) In this section "security services" means service in the Belize Police Department, the Belize National Coast Guard 
Service, and in the military service as defined in subsection (3) of this section: 

Provided that the provisions ofthis Part shall not apply to the Commissioner of Police, the Commander, Belize Defence 
Force or the Commandant, Belize National Coast Guard Service. 

(3) For the purposes of this section, "military service" means service in the Belize Defence Force or in any other 
military, naval or air force established for Belize. 

(4) Subject to this Sub-Part, any officer holding or acting in an office in the security services immediately before the 
commencement of this section shall continue to hold or act in that office and to be subject to the same terms and 
conditions of service as obtained immediately prior to the commencement of this section. 

(5) The Security Services Commission may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, 
delegate any of its powers under subsection (1) of this section to anyone or more members of the Security Services 
Commission or, with the consent of the Prime Minister, to the Commissioner of Police or the Commandant, Belize Defence 
Force or the Commandant, Belize National Coast Guard Service. 

(6) The Security Services Commission may, in accordance with subsection (5), authorise the Commissioner of Police to 
subdelegate the powers delegated to him under that subsection to a member of the Belize Police Department of the rank of 
Inspector and above, in respect of matters affecting members of the Belize Police Department of the rank of Assistant 
Inspector and below. 

(7) The Security Services Commission may, In accordance with subsection (5), authorise- 

S.I. No. 34 of 2010 

(i) the Commander, Belize Defence Force, to sub-delegate the powers delegated to him under that subsection to a member of 
the Belize Defence Force of the rank of Captain and above, in respect of matters affecting members of the Belize Defence 
Force of the rank of Lieutenant and below; 

(ii) the Commandant, Belize National Coast Guard Service, to sub-delegate the powers delegated to him under that 
subsection to a member of the Belize National Coast Guard Service of the rank of Lieutenant and above, in respect of 
matters affecting members of the Belize National Coast Guard Service of the rank of Chief Petty Officer and below. 

(8) Subsection (3) to (15) of section 110E of this Constitution shall apply, with such modifications as may 390f2001. be 
necessary, to members of the Security Services Commission. 

SUB-PART III 

The Judicial and Legal Services Commission 

11OE.-( 1) There shall be established for Belize a Judicial and Legal Services Commission. 

(2) The members ofthe Judicial and Legal Services Commission shall be appointed by the Governor-General and shall consist 
of:- 

(a) the ChiefJustice, who shall be a member and Chairman; 

(b) the Chairman of the Public Services Commission; 

(c) the Solicitor General; and 

(d) the President of the Bar Association ofBelize. 

(3) Subject to subsection (2), no person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member of the Judicial and Legal 
Services Commission if he is a member ofthe National Assembly, or ifhe holds or is acting in any public office. 

(4) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not, while he holds or is acting in the office of a member of the Judicial 
and Legal Services Commission or within a period of two years commencing from the date on which he last held or acted in 
that office, be eligible for appointment to any public office. 

(5) Subj ect to the provisions of this section, the office of a member ofthe Judicial and Legal Services Commission shall 
become vacant:- 

(a) at the expiration of three years from the date ofhis appointment or such earlier time, being not less than one year, 
as may be specified in the instrument by which he was appointed; or 

(b) if any circumstances arise that, ifhe were not a member ofthe Judicial and Legal Services Commission, would cause him 
to be disqualified for appointment as such. 

(6) A member of the Judicial and Legal Services 20£2001. 

Commission may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from 
infirmity of mind or body or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except III accordance 
with the provisions of this section. 

(7) A member of the Judicial and Legal Services 20£2001. 

Commission shall be removed from office by the Governor­ General ifthe question ofthe removal of that member from office 
has been referred to the Belize Advisory Council in accordance with the next following subsection and the Belize Advisory 
Council has advised the Governor- General that that member ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or 
for misbehaviour. 

(8) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor- 20£2001. 

General that the question of removing a member of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission under this section ought to 
be investigated, then- 

(a) the Governor-General shall refer the matter to the Belize Advisory Council which shall sit as a tribunal in the 
manner provided in section 54 of this Constitution; and 

(b) the Belize Advisory Council shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General 
whether that member of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission should be removed under this section. 

(9) If the question of removing a member of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission from office has been referred to 
the Belize Advisory Council under the preceding subsection, the Governor-General may suspend the member from performing 
the functions of his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General and shall in any 
case cease to have effect ifthe Belize Advisory Council advises the Governor-General that the member should not be removed 
from office. 

(10) If the office of a member of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission is vacant or a member is for any reason 
unable to perform the functions of his office, the Governor-General may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment 
as a member of that Commission to act as a member of the Commission, and any person so appointed shall, subject to the 
provisions of subsections (6), (7), (8) and (9) of this section, continue to act until he is notified by the 
Governor-General that the circumstances giving rise to the appointment have ceased to exist. 

(11) A member of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has 
taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and office. 

(12) The Judicial and Legal Services Commission shall, in the exercise of its functions under this Constitution, not be 
subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority. 

(13) The Judicial and Legal Services Commission may by regulations make provision for regulating and facilitating the 
performance of its functions under this Constitution. 

(14) Subject to the provisions of this section, the 2 of 2001. 

Judicial and Legal Services Commission may regulate its own procedure. 

(15) Any decision of the Judicial and Legal Services 2 of 2001. 

Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof and, subject to its rules ofprocedure, 
the Judicial and Legal Services Commission may act notwithstanding the absence of any member other than the Chairman: 

Provided that in any matter before the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, where the votes are equally divided, the 
Chairman shall have a casting vote in addition to his original vote. 

11OF.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the power to review the suitability of judicial of applicants, and 
to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the judicial and legal and legal services, including the power to make 
appointments, promotions, transfers, to officers, etc. confirm appointments, and to deal with all matters relating to the 
conditions of service of such judicial and legal officers and, subject to the provisions of section 111 ofthis 
Constitution, the power to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and the power to 
remove such persons from office shall vest in the Judicial and Legal Services Commission established under section 11 OE 
ofthis Constitution. 

(2) In this section, "judicial and legal services" means service as Registrar General, Deputy Registrar General, 
Registrar, Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar of the Supreme Court, Registrar and Deputy Registrar of the Court of 
Appeal, Chief Magistrate, Magistrate, Legal Draftsman, Law Revision Counsel, Parliamentary Counsel, Senior Crown Counsel, 
Crown Counsel, Registrar and Deputy Registrar of 

Appointment of judicial and legal officers, etc. 

Intellectual Property, Assistant Registrar, Companies and Corporate Affairs Registry, and such other posts requiring a 
legal qualification as the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice ofthe Prime Minister, may from time to 
time by Order published in the Gazette, prescribe. 

(3) Any officer holding or acting in an office in the judicial and legal services immediately before the commencement 
ofthis section shall continue to hold or act in that office and to be subject to the same terms and conditions of service 
as obtained immediately prior to the commencement of this section. 

(4) The Judicial and Legal Services Commission may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as it thinks 
fit, delegate any of its powers under subsection (1) ofthis section to anyone or more members ofthe Judicial and Legal 
Services Commission or, with the consent ofthe Prime Minister, to any public officer who is a judicial or legal officer. 

SUB-PART IV 

Appeals in Discipline Cases 

111.-(1) This section applies to- 

(a) any decision of the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister or the Public 
Services Commission or the Judicial and Legal Services Commission or the Security Services Commission, as the case may be,
in relation to the public service, judicial and legal service or security service, or any decision of the Public Services 
Commission orthe Judicial and Legal Services Commission or the Security Services Commission to remove a public officer 
from office or to exercise disciplinary control over a public officer (including a decision made on appeal from or 
confirming a decision of any person to whom powers are delegated under section 11OF(4) or section 106(5) or section 
11OD(5) ofthis Constitution); 

(b) any decision of any person to whom powers are delegated under section 11OF(4)orsection 1 06(5) or section 11 ODe 5) of 
this Constitution to remove a public officer from office or to exercise disciplinary control over a public officer (not 
being a decision which is subject to appeal to or confirmation by the Judicial and Legal Services Commission or the 
Public Services Commission or the Security Services Commission). 

(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, an appeal 20£2001. shall lie to the Belize Advisory Council from any 
decision to which this section applies at the instance of the public officer in respect of whom the decision is made. 

(3) Upon an appeal under this section the Belize Advisory Council may affirm or set aside the decision appealed against or 
may make any other decision which the authority or person from whom the appeal lies could have made. 

(4) Subject to the provisions of section 54 of this Constitution, the Belize Advisory Council may by regulation make 
provision for- 

(a) the procedure in appeals under this section; or 

(b) excepting from the provisions of subsection (2) of this section decisions in respect of public officers holding 
offices whose emoluments do not exceed such sum as may be prescribed by the regulations or such decisions to exercise 
disciplinary control, other than decisions to remove from office, as may be prescribed. 

(5) Regulations made under this section may, with the consent ofthe Prime Minister, confer powers or impose duties on any 
public officer or any authority of the Government for the purpose of the exercise of the functions of the Belize Advisory 
Council. 

(6) In this section, "public officer" includes any person holding or acting in an office in the military service as 
defined in section 11 OD(3) of this Constitution. 

SUB-PART V 

Pension Laws and Pension Rights of Public Officers 

112.-(1) The law to be applied with respect to any pensions benefits that were granted to any person before Independence 
Day shall be the law that was in force at the date on which those benefits were granted or any law in force at a later 
date that is not less favourable to that person. 

(2) The law to be applied with respect to any pensions benefits (not being benefits to which subsection (1) of this 
section applies) shall- 

(a) in so far as those benefits are wholly in respect of a period of service as a public officer that commenced before 
Independence Day, be the law that was in force immediately before that date; and 

(b) in so far as those benefits are wholly or partly in respect of a period of service as a public officer that commenced 
after Independence Day, be the law in force on the date on which that period of service commenced, or any law in force at 
a later date not less favourable to that person. 

(3) Where a person is entitled to exercise an option as to which of two or more laws shall apply in his case, the law for 
which he opts shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be more favourable to him than the other law or laws. 

(4) All pensions benefits shall (except to the extent to which, in the case of benefits under the Widows' and Orphans' 
Pensions Act or under any law amending or replacing that Act, they are a charge on a fund established by that Act or by 
any such law and have been duly paid out of that fund to the person or authority to whom payment is due) be a charge on 
the general revenues of Belize. 

(5) In this section, "pensions benefits" means any pensions, compensation, gratuities or other like allowances for persons 
in respect of their service as public officers or for the widows, children, dependents or personal representatives of such 
persons in respect of such service. 

(6) References in this section to the law with respect to pensions benefits include (without prejudice to their generality) 
references to the law regulating the circumstances in which such benefits may be granted or in which the grant of such 
benefits may be refused, the law regulating the circumstances in which any such benefits that have been granted may be 
withheld, reduced in amount or suspended and the law regulating the amount of any such benefits. 

113.-(1) The power to grant any award under any pensions law for the time being in force in Belize (other than an award to
which, under that law, the person to whom it is payable is entitled as of right) and, in accordance with any provisions 
in that behalf contained in any such law, to withhold, reduce in amount or suspend any award payable under any such law, 
shall vest in the Governor-General. 

(2) The power vested in the Governor-General by the preceding subsection shall be exercised by him- 

(a) in the case of officers to whom section 107 of this Constitution applies, acting in accordance with the advice of the 
Prime Minister; 

(b) in the case of public officers in the judicial and legal services to whom section 110F(1)ofthis Constitution applies, 
acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission; 

(c) in the case of public officers in the security services to whom section 110D of this Constitution applies, acting in 
accordance with the advice of the Security Services Commission; 

(d) in the case of all other officers, acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Services Commission. 

(3) In this section, "pensions law" means any law relating to the grant to any person, or to the widow, children, 
dependents or personal representatives of that person, of an award in respect of the services of that person in a public 
office, and includes any instrument made under any such law. 

PART IX 

Finance 

114.-(1) All revenues or other moneys raised orreceived by Belize (not being revenues or other moneys payable under this 
Constitution or any other law into some other public fund established for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form 
one Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

(2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Revenue Fund except to meet expenditure that is charged upon the 
Fund by this Constitution or any other law enacted by the National Assembly or where the issue of those moneys has been 
authorised by an appropriation law or by a law made in pursuance of section 116 of this Constitution. 

(3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund other than the Consolidated Revenue Fund unless the issue ofthose 
moneys has been authorised by a law enacted by the National Assembly. 

(4) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund except in the manner 
prescribed by law. 

115.-( 1) The Minister responsible for finance shall prepare and lay before the House of Representatives in each financial
year estimates of the revenues and expenditures of Belize for the next following financial year. 

(2) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates (other than expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Revenue 
Fund by this Constitution or any other law) shall be included in a Bill, to be known as an Appropriation Bill, providing 
for the issue from the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of 
those sums for the purposes specified therein. 

Establishment of Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

Authorization of expenditure from Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation. 

Contingencies Fund. 

(3) If in respect of any financial year it is found- 

(a) that the amount appropriated by the appropriation law for any purpose is insufficient or that a need has arisen for 
expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that law; or 

(b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for the purpose by the 
appropriation law or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that law, 

a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House of Representatives and the 
heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 

116. Any law enacted by the National Assembly may make provision under which, if the appropriation law in respect of any 
financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister responsible for finance 
may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary 
to carry on the services ofthe Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or 
the coming into operation ofthe appropriation law, whichever is the earlier. 

117.-(1) Any law enacted by the National Assembly may provide for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for 
authorising the Minister responsible for finance, if satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for 
expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make advances from the Fund to meet that need. 

(2) Where any advance is made in accordance with subsection (1) ofthis section, a supplementary estimate shall be 
presented and a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced as soon as possible for the purpose of replacing the 
amount so advanced. 

118.-(1) There shall be paid to the holders ofthe offices to which this section applies such salaries and such allowances 
as may be prescribed by or under a law enacted by the National Assembly. 

(2) The salaries and allowances prescribed in pursuance of this section in respect of the holders of the offices to which 
this section applies shall be a charge on the Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

(3) The salary prescribed in pursuance ofthis section in respect of the holder of any office to which this section applies 
and his other terms of service (other than allowances that are not taken into account in computing, under any law in that 
behalf, any pension payable in respect of his service in that office) shall not be altered to his disadvantage after his 
appointment. 

(4) When a person's salary or other terms of service depend upon his option, the salary or terms for which he opts shall, 
for the purposes of subsection (3) of this section, be deemed to be more advantageous to him than any others for which he 
might have opted. 

(5) This section applies to the offices of the Govemor­ General, the Chief Justice, Justice of the Court of Appeal, 
Justice of the Supreme Court, member of the Belize Advisory Council, member of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission 
or the Security Services Commission or the Public Services Commission, member of the Elections and Boundaries Commission, 
the Director of Public Prosecutions, members of the Integrity Commission, the Ombudsman, the Contractor General and the 
Auditor-General. 

(6) The budgets presented by the offices of the Auditor General, the Ombudsman, the Contractor General, the Elections and 
Boundaries Commission, the Integrity Commission, the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Supreme Court and the Court of 
Appeal shall be given first priority calls on the Consolidated Revenue Fund. 

(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prejudicing the provisions of section 112 ofthis Constitution. 

119.-(1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated Revenue Fund all debt charges for which Belize is liable. 

(2) For the purposes of this section debt charges include interest, sinking fund charges, the repayment or amortization of 
debt, and all expenditure in connection with the raising of loans on the security of the Consolidated Revenue Fund and 
the service and redemption of debt created thereby. 

120. -( 1 ) There shall be an Auditor-General whose office shall be a public office. 

(2) The Auditor-General shall- 

(a) satisfy himself that all moneys that have been appropriated by the National Assembly and disbursed have been applied 
to the purposes to which they were so appropriated and that the expenditure conforms to the authority that governs it; and 

(b) at least once in every year audit and report on the public accounts of Belize, the accounts of all officers and 
authorities of the Government, the accounts of all courts oflaw in Belize, the accounts ofthe Belize Advisory Council and 
every Commission established by this Constitution and the accounts ofthe Clerk to the National Assembly. 

(3) The Auditor-General and any officer authorised by him shall have access to all books, records, returns, reports and 
other documents which in his opinion relate to any of the accounts referred to in subsection (2) of this section. 

(4) The Auditor-General shall submit every report made by him in pursuance of subsection (2) of this section to the 
Minister responsible for finance who shall, not later than seven days after the House of Representatives first meets 
after he has received the report, lay it before the House. The Auditor General shall forthwith notify the Clerk, National 
Assembly, ofthe date on which he submitted the report to the Minister. 

(5) If the Minister fails to lay a report before the House in accordance with the provisions of subsection (4) of this 
section, the Clerk, National Assembly, shall forthwith inform the Auditor-General who shall promptly transmit copies of 
that report directly to the Clerk, and the Clerk shall, as soon as practicable, lay the report on the table of the House 
of Representatives and the Senate. 

(6) The Auditor-General shall exercise such other functions in relation to the accounts of the Government or the accounts 
of other authorities or bodies established by law for public purposes as may be prescribed by or under any law enacted by 
the National Assembly. 

(7) In the exercise of his functions under subsections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this section, the Auditor-General shall 
not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority. 

(8) Where the Auditor General fails to submit a report to the National Assembly in accordance with subsection (5) of this 
section, he may be required to appear before the Senate to answer to his failure to comply with the requirements of this 
section. 

(9) The Senate may, where it considers it appropriate having regard to all the circumstances of the case, extend the 
period of time within which the Auditor General shall submit his report. 

(10) Where the Auditor General fails to submit a report within the prescribed time or extended time as the case may be - 

(i) such failure may be deemed a failure by the Auditor General in the due performance of the duties of his office, for 
the purpose of removal from office pursuant to section 109 (5); and 

(ii) the Senate shall forward a report on the matter to the Prime Minister with such recommendations as the Senate may 
consider fit. 

PART X 

Miscellaneous 

121.-(1) The persons to whom this section applies shall conduct themselves in such a way as not- 

(a) to place themselves in positions in which they have or could have a conflict of interest; 

(b) to compromise the fair exercise of their public or official functions and duties; 

(c) to use their office for private gain; 

(d) to demean their office or position; 

(e) to allow their integrity to be called into question; or 

(f) to endanger or diminish respect for, or confidence in, the integrity of the Government. 

(2) This section applies to the Governor-General, members ofthe National Assembly, members ofthe Belize Advisory Council, 
members of the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, the Security Services Commission or the Public Services Commission,
members ofthe Elections and Boundaries Commission, public officers of statutory corporations and government agencies, and 
such other officers as may be prescribed by law enacted by the National Assembly. 

122. The national symbols of Belize shall be those prescribed by the National Assembly. 

123.-(1) Any reference in this Constitution to power to make appointments to any public office shall be construed as 
including a reference to the power to make appointments on promotion and transfer to that office and to the power to 
appoint a person to act in that office during any period during which it is vacant or the holder thereof is unable to 
perform the functions of that office. 

(2) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, a reference to the holder of an office by the term 
designating his office shall be construed as including a reference to any person who is for the time being lawfully 
acting in or performing the functions of that office. 

(3) Where by this Constitution any person is directed, or power is conferred on any person or authority to appoint a 
person, to act in or otherwise to perform the functions of an office if the holder thereof is unable to perform the 
functions of that office, the validity of any performance of those functions by the person so directed or of any 
appointment made in exercise of that power shall not be called in question in any court of law on the ground that the 
holder ofthe office is not unable to perform the functions of the office. 

(4) Where by this Constitution the Governor-General is required to appoint a person to act in, or otherwise to perform 
the functions of, an office established by this Constitution or a public office, either acting in his own deliberate 
judgment or on the advice of any person, such power of appointment shall not be exercised after the National Assembly has 
been dissolved in accordance with section 84 ofthis Constitution prior to a general election of members of the House of 
Representatives. 

124.-(1) Where any person has vacated any office established by this Constitution, he may, if qualified, again be 
appointed or elected to hold that office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 

(2) Whenever the holder of any office constituted by or under this Constitution, or any public office otherwise 
constituted, is on leave of absence pending relinquishment of his office- 

(a) another person may be appointed to that office; and 

(b) that person shall, for the purpose of any function of that office, be deemed to be the sole holder ofthat office. 

125.-(1) References in this Constitution to the power to remove a public officer from his office shall be construed as 
including references to any power conferred by any law to require or permit that officer to retire from the public 
service and to any power or right to terminate a contract on which a person is employed as a public officer and to 
determine whether any such contract shall or shall not be renewed: 

Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as conferring on any person or authority power to require any 
Justice of the Supreme Court or Justice of Appeal, the Director of Public Prosecutions, or the Auditor-General to retire 
from the public service. 

(2) Any provision of this Constitution that vests in any person or authority power to remove any public officer from his 
office shall be without prejudice to the power of any person or authority to abolish any office or to any law providing 
for the compulsory retirement of public officers generally or any class of public officer on attaining an age specified 
therein. 

126.-(1) A Senator or a member of the House of Representatives may resign his seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the President or the Speaker, as the case maybe, and the resignation shall take effect, and the seat shall accordingly 
become vacant, when the writing is received, as the case may be, by- 

(a) the President or Speaker; 

(b) if the office of President or Speaker is vacant or the President or Speaker is for any reason unable to perform the 
functions of his office and no other person is performing them, the Vice-President or Deputy Speaker; or 

(c) if the office of Vice-President or Deputy Speaker is vacant or the Vice-President or Deputy Speaker is for any reason 
unable to perform the functions of his office and no other person is performing them, the Clerk to the National Assembly. 

(2) The President or the Vice-President or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker may resign his office by writing under his 
hand addressed to the Senate or the House, as the case may be, and the resignation shall take effect, and the office 
shall accordingly become vacant, when the writing is received by the Clerk to the National Assembly. 

(3) Any person who has been appointed to an office established by this Constitution (other than an office to which 
subsection (1) or (2) of this section applies) or any office of Minister established under this Constitution may resign 
that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed and the resignation 
shall take effect, and the office shall accordingly become vacant- 

(a) at such time or on such date (if any) as may be specified in the writing; or 

(b) when the writing is received by the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by such other person as may be 
authorised to receive it, whichever is the later: 

Provided that the resignation may be withdrawn before it takes effect if the person or authority to whom the resignation 
is addressed consents to its withdrawal. 

127. No provision of this Constitution that any person or authority shall not be subject to the direction or control of 
any other person or authority in the exercise of any 

functions under this Constitution shall be construed as precluding a court of law from exercising jurisdiction in 
relation to any question whether that person or authority has performed those functions in accordance with this 
Constitution or any other law or should not perform those functions. 

128. Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make any proclamation, regulation, order or rule, or to give 
any direction or instructions, the power shall be construed as including the power, exercisable in like manner, to amend 
or revoke any such proclamation, regulation, order, rule, direction or instructions. 

129.-(1) Where any person or authority is directed by this Constitution to exercise any function after consultation with 
any other person or authority, that person or authority shall not be obliged to exercise that function in accordance with 
the advice of that other person or authority. 

(2) Where any person or authority is directed by this Constitution or any other law to consult any other person or 
authority before taking any decision or action, that other person or authority must be given a genuine opportunity to 
present his or its views before the decision or action, as the case may be, is taken. 

130. There shall be a national seal bearing on it such device as the National Assembly shall approve by resolution. 

131.-(1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requrres- 

"Agreement" means the Agreement Establishing the Caribbean Court of Justice, signed at Bridgetown, Barbados, on the 14th 
day of February 2001; 

"Caribbean Court of Justice" means the Court established by the Agreement; 

"Commonwealth citizen" has such meaning as the National Assembly may prescribe; 

"Court of Appeal" means the Court of Appeal established by this Constitution; 

"Crown" means the Crown in right of Belize; 

"financial year" means the twelve months ending on 31 st March in any year or on such other date as may from time to time 
be prescribed by any law enacted by the National Assembly; 

"the Gazette" means the Belize Government Gazette and includes any supplement thereto; 

"the Government" means the Government of Belize; 

"the House" means the House of Representatives or the Senate as the context may require; 

"the House of Representatives" means the House of Representatives established by this Constitution; 

"Independence Day" means 21 st September, 1981; 

"law" means any law in force in Belize or any part thereof, including any instrument having the force of law and any 
unwritten rule oflaw, and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly; 

"Minister" means a Minister of Government; 

"the National Assembly" means the National Assembly 

established by this Constitution; "oath" includes affirmation; 

"oath of allegiance and office" means the oath prescribed in Schedule 3. 

Schedule 3 to this Constitution; 

"Police Department" means the Belize Police Department; 

"President" and "Vice-President" mean the respective persons holding office as President and Vice-President of the Senate; 

"public office" means any office of emolument in the public service; 

"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office; 

"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service ofthe Crown in a civil capacity in 
respect ofthe Government; 

"Senate" means the Senate established by this Constitution; 

"session" means, in relation to a House of the National Assembly, the sittings of that House commencing when it first 
meets after the prorogation or dissolution of the National Assembly at any time and terminating when the National 
Assembly is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued; 

"sitting" means, in relation to a House of the National Assembly, a period during which that House is sitting continuously 
without adjournment and includes any period during which the House is in committee; 

"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" mean the respective persons holding office as Speaker and Deputy Speaker ofthe House 

of Representatives; 

"Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of Judicature established by this Constitution. 

"Treaty" means the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas establishing the Caribbean Community including the Caricom Single Market 
and Economy that was signed in The Bahamas on the 5th day of July, 2001. 

(2) Except in sections 63 (1) and 71 of this Constitution, references in this Constitution to a member or members ofthe 
House of Representatives or to a Senator or Senators do not include references to a person who, under section 56(2), is a 
member of the House by virtue of holding the office of Speaker, or who, under section 61 (2), is a Senator by virtue of 
holding the office of President. 

(3) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, references to an office in the public service shall be 
construed as including references to the offices of Justice of the Supreme Court and Justice of Appeal, offices of members 
of the Police Department, and offices on the Governor-General's personal staff. 

(4) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, references to an office in the public service sha11 not 
be construed as including references to the office of Prime Minister or other Minister of State, Speaker or Deputy 
Speaker or member of the House of Representatives, President or Vice-President or Senator, member of the Belize Advisory 
Council, or member of any Commission established by this Constitution or the Clerk, Deputy Clerk or staff of the National 
Assembly. 

( 4a) In this Constitution or in any other Act, Ordinance, rule, regulation, order or other instrument having effect as 
part of the laws of Belize, a reference- 

(a) to "the Police Force" or to "the Force" shall be substituted by the words "the Police Department" or "the Department", 
as the case maybe; 

(b) to "the Permanent Secretary" shall be substituted by the words "the Chief Executive Officer"; 

(c) to the "Judicial and Legal Services Section of the Public Services Commission" shall be substituted by the words "the 
Judicial and Legal Services Commission". 

(5) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be regarded as holding a public office by reason only of 
the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service under the Crown. 

(6) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the Interpretation Act 1980 as in force immediately before 
Independence Day shall apply, with the necessary adaptations, for the purpose of interpreting this Constitution. 

PART XI 

Transitional Provisions 

132. In this Part- 

"the Constitution Ordinance" means the British Honduras Constitution Ordinance 1963; 

"the Letters Patent" means the Belize Letters Patent 1964 to 1979 

Interpretation of this Part. 

The Constitution - transitional powers. 

Existing laws. 

133. The Governor (as defined for the purposes of the Letters Patent) acting after with the Premier (as so defined) may 
at any time after this section comes into operation exercise any of the powers conferred on the Governor- General by 
section 134 of this Constitution to such extent as may be necessary or expedient to enable the Constitution to function 
as from Independence Day. 

134.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the existing laws shall notwithstanding the revocation of the Letters 
Patent and the Constitution Ordinance continue in force on and after Independence Day and shall then have effect as if 
they had been made in pursuance ofthis Constitution but they shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, 
qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this Constitution. 

(2) Where any matter that falls to be prescribed or otherwise provided for under this Constitution by the National 
Assembly or by any other authority or person is prescribed or provided for by or under an existing law (including any 
amendment to any such law made under this section) that prescription or provision shall as from Independence Day have 
effect (with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring it into 
conformity with this Constitution) as if it had been made under this Constitution by the National Assembly or as the case 
may require by the other authority or person. 

(3) The Governor-General may by Order published in the Gazette within twelve months after Independence Day make such 
amendments to any existing law (other than this Constitution) as may be necessary or expedient for bringing that law into 
conformity with the provisions of this Constitution or otherwise for giving effect or enabling effect to be given to 
those provisions. 

(4) An Order made under this section may be amended or revoked by the National Assembly or in relation to any existing 
law affected thereby, by any other authority having power to amend, repeal or revoke that existing law. 

(5) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any powers conferred by this Constitution or by any 
other law upon any person or authority to make provision for any matter, including the amendment or repeal of any 
existing law. 

(6) In this section, the expression .existing law. means any Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, Order of Her 
Majesty in Council, Ordinance, rule, regulation, order or other instrument having effect as part of the law of Belize 
immediately before Independence Day (including any such law made before that day and coming into operation on or after 
that day). 

135.-(1) Her Majesty may before Independence Day appoint the first Governor-General from among persons who qualify by 
virtue of section 23 of this Constitution to become citizens of Belize on Independence Day. 

(2) Any such appointment shall take effect as from Independence Day, and the person so appointed shall hold office in 
accordance with section 30 of this Constitution. 

136.-(1) The person who, immediately before Independence Day, holds the office of Premier under the Letters Patent shall, 
as from that day, hold office as Prime Minister as if he had been appointed thereto under section 37 of this Constitution. 

(2) The persons who, immediately before Independence Day, hold office as Ministers (other than the Premier) under the 
Letters Patent shall, as from that day, hold the like offices as ifthey had been appointed thereto under section 40 of 
this Constitution. 

First Governor­ General. 

Ministers. 

154 

Belize Constitution 

[CAP. 4 

National Assembly. 

(3) Any person holding the office of Prime Minister or other Minister by virtue of subsections (1) and (2) of this section
who, immediately before Independence Day, was under the Letters Patent assigned responsibility for any business or 
department of government shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been assigned responsibility for that business or 
department under section 41 ofthis Constitution. 

(4) Any person holding the office of Prime Minister or other Minister by virtue of subsections (1) and (2) ofthis section 
shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements of section 46 of this Constitution. 

13 7 .-(1) The persons who, immediately before Independence Day, are members of the former House of Representatives 
shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been elected in pursuance of section 56 (1) ofthis Constitution in the 
respective electoral divisions corresponding to the electoral divisions by which they were returned to the former House 
of Representatives, and shall hold their seats in the House of Representatives in accordance with the provisions of this 
Constitution. 

(2) The persons who, immediately before Independence Day, are members of the former Senate, having been appointed as such 
under paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of section 9 (2) of the Constitution Ordinance, shall, as from Independence Day, be 
deemed to have been appointed to the Senate in pursuance of section 61 of this Constitution, and shall hold their seats 
in the Senate in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 

(3) The persons deemed to be elected to the House of Representatives or to be appointed to the Senate by virtue of 
subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements of section 71 of this 
Constitution. 

(4) The persons who, immediately before Independence Day, are the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the former House of 
Representatives and the President and Vice-President of the former Senate shall, as from Independence Day, be deemed to 
have been elected respectively as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives and President and 
Vice-President ofthe Senate in accordance with the provisions ofthis Constitution and shall hold office in accordance 
with those provisions. 

(5) The person who, immediately before Independence Day, is the Leader of the Opposition in the former House of 
Representatives shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been appointed as Leader of the Opposition in pursuance of 
section 47 of this Constitution, and shall hold office as such in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 

(6) The Standing Orders of the former House of Representatives and of the former Senate as in force immediately before 
Independence Day shall, until it is otherwise provided under section 70 of this Constitution, be the Standing Orders 
respectively of the House of Representatives and ofthe Senate, but they shall be construed with such modifications, 
adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this Constitution. 

(7) Notwithstanding anything in section 84 (2) of the Constitution (but subject to subsection (3) ofthat section), the 
National Assembly shall, unless sooner dissolved, stand dissolved on 30th November 1984 (that is to say, five years from 
the date when the two Houses of the former National Assembly first met after the last dissolution ofthat Assembly under 
the Constitution Ordinance). 

(8) In this section, the expressions "former National Assembly", "former House of Representatives", and "former Senate" 
mean respectively the National Assembly, House of Representatives, and Senate established by the Constitution Ordinance. 

Existing public officers. 

Supreme Court and Court of Appeal. 

138. Subj ect to the provisions of this Constitution every person who immediately before Independence Day holds or is 
acting in a public office under the Letters Patent or the Constitution Ordinance shall, as from that day, continue to 
hold or act in that office or the corresponding office established by this Constitution as ifhe had been appointed 
thereto in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and as ifhe had taken any oath required by this 
Constitution or any other law: 

Provided that any person who under the Letters Patent, the Constitution Ordinance or any other law in force immediately 
before Independence Day would have been required to vacate his office at the expiration of any period shall, unless 
earlier removed in accordance with this Constitution, vacate his office at the expiration of that period. 

139.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall on and after Independence Day have all 
the powers which immediately before that day are vested in the former Supreme Court. 

(2) All proceedings that, immediately before Independence Day, are pending before the former Supreme Court may be 
continued and concluded on and after that day before the Supreme Court. 

(3) Any decision given before Independence Day by the former Supreme Court shall for the purposes of its enforcement or 
of any appeal therefrom have effect on and after that day as if it were a decision of the Supreme Court. 

(4) Any appeals from Belize that, immediately before Independence Day, are pending before the former Court of Appeal may 
be continued and concluded on and after that day before the Court of Appeal. 

(5) Any decision given before Independence Day by the former Court of Appeal shall for the purposes of its enforcement or 
of any appeal therefrom have effect on and after that day as ifit were a decision of the Court of Appeal. 

(6) In this section- 

"the former Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court established by the Constitution Ordinance; 

"the former Court of Appeal" means the Court of Appeal established by the Court of Appeal Ordinance 1967. 

140.-(1) The National Assembly may alter any of the provisions of this Part, other than those referred to in subsection 
(2) of this section, in the manner specified in section 69(4) of this Constitution. 

(2) The National Assembly may alter this section, subsections (1), (4) and (7) of section 137, section 138 and section 
139 of this Constitution in the manner specified in subsections (3) and (5) of section 69 of this Constitution. 

(3) Subsections (7) and (8) of section 69 of this Constitution shall apply for the purpose of construing references in 
this section to any provision of this Part and to the alteration of any such provision as they apply for the purpose of 
construing references in section 69 of this Constitution and in Schedule 2 hereto to any provision of this Constitution 
to the alteration of any such provision. 

Alteration of this Part. 

Schedule 2. 

Commencement. 

Revocations. Schedule 4. 

PART XII 

Repeal and Date of Commencement 

141. This Constitution shall come into operation on Independence Day. 

Provided that sections 133 and 135 ofthis Constitution shall come into operation forthwith. 

142. The Ordinances set out in Schedule 4 are revoked with effect from Independence Day. 


Section 1 

SCHEDULE 1 TO THE CONSTITUTION 

Definition oJBelize 

1. The territory of Belize comprises the mainland of Belize and all its associated islands and cayes within the area 
bounded by the frontiers with Guatemala and Mexico and the outer limit of the territorial sea of Belize described as 
follows:- 

(a) the frontier with Guatemala is the line prescribed by the Treaty between the United Kingdom and Guatemala signed on 
30 April 1859; 

(b) the frontier with Mexico is the line prescribed by the Treaty between the United Kingdom and Mexico signed on 8 July 
1893; 

(c) the outer limit of the territorial sea of Belize is the limit provided by law measured from such baselines as may 
have been prescribed before Independence Day by law or otherwise, or as may be so prescribed thereafter, 

and also includes the Turneffe Islands, the Cayes of Lighthouse Reef and Glover Reef, together with all associated is lets 
and reefs, and their adjacent waters as far as the outer limit ofthe territorial sea appertaining to them. 

2. The area referred to in paragraph 1 ofthis Schedule includes, but is not limited to, Ambergris Caye, Caye Caulker, 
Caye Chapel, Long Caye, Frenchman's Caye, St. George's Caye, Sergeant's Caye, Goff's Caye, English Caye, Rendezvous Caye, 
Bluefield Range of Cayes, Southern Long Caye, Columbus Caye, Fly Range of Cayes, Tobacco Range of Cayes, Southern Water 
Caye, Carrie Bow Caye, Gladden Caye, Silk Cayes, Pompion Caye, Ranguana Range of Cayes, Sapodilla Range of Cayes, Snake 
Cayes, all islands and cayes associated with the above­ mentioned cayes, and all other cayes lying within and along the 
Barrier Reef. 

Section 69 

SCHEDULE 2 TO THE CONSTITUTION 

Alteration of Constitution Provisions of Constitution referred to in section 69(3)- 

(i) Part II; 

(ii) sections 55 to 60 (inclusive), 84, 85, 88 to 93 (inclusive); 

(iii) Part VII; 

(iv) sections 52 (2), 54, 108 (7) and (8), 109 (6) and (7), and 111; 

(v) sections 105 and 106. 

CAP.4J 

Belize Constitution 

161 

Section 131 (1) 

2 of 2001. 

SCHEDULE 3 TO THE CONSTITUTION 

Form of Oath and Form of Affirmation Form 

of Oath 

Oath of Allegiance and Office 

I, , do swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Belize, and will uphold the Constitution and the law, and 
that I will conscientiously, impartially and to the best of my ability discharge my duties as [ ] and do right to all 
manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. [So help me, God.] 

Form of Affirmation 

Affirmation of Allegiance and Office 

I, , do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Belize, and will uphold 
the Constitution and the law, and that I will conscientiously, impartially and to the best of my ability discharge my 
duties as [ ] and do right to all manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. 

SCHEDULE 4 TO THE CONSTITUTION 

REVOCATIONS 

Ordinance Revoked 

References 

British Honduras Constitution Ordinance, 1963. 

No. 33/1963 

British Honduras Constitution (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966 

No. 23/1966 

British Honduras Constitution (Amendment) Ordinance, 1970 

No. 9/1970 